
==================== SOURCE MVD (349 pages) ====================


----- TERM: hungry -----
[MVD p8 ?] ...ं का रचना स्पष्ट होना समझ में आया। Coexistence : - Entire insentient and sentient nature was understood to be saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and overfull atoms, and the development ( vikas ) of the atom itself as satiated, constitutionally complete atoms, i.e., 'jeevan' in its being and abiding. In coexistence itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of jeev...

----- TERM: overfull -----
[MVD p8 ?] ...्पष्ट होना समझ में आया। Coexistence : - Entire insentient and sentient nature was understood to be saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and overfull atoms, and the development ( vikas ) of the atom itself as satiated, constitutionally complete atoms, i.e., 'jeevan' in its being and abiding. In coexistence itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of jeevan . In coe...

----- TERM: ten-tier -----
[MVD p18 ?] ...नीय प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था में न व षमता ( सामरस्यता ) एवं एकसूत्रता । Universal Auspiciousness Harmony and integrality in all four dimensions (work, behaviour, thought, and realisation), all five statuses (individual, family, society, nation, and world) of humans, and the ten-tier family based self-governance orderliness. 28. महा मांगल्य सत्यानुभू त जागृ त ( भ्रम मुिक्त ) । The Greatest Auspiciousness Awakening as realisation in truth (liberation from delusion) 29. उपलिब्ध सहअिस्तत्व में स्था पत मूल्यों में अनुभू त । समाधान , समृद् ध अभय , सहअिस्त...
[MVD p161 Chapter-11] ... रवार सभाओं के रूप में पहचान होता है । The tiers of human living have been recognised as individual, family, society, state, nation, and inter-nation. Another way involves recognising these as individual, family, undivided society, and universal orderliness. The third way is the ten-tier family-based orderliness, wherein family is the first tier, and every individual takes responsibility based on understanding. page- 161 ...

----- TERM: ten staged -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: family based -----
[MVD p18 ?] ...र मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था में न व षमता ( सामरस्यता ) एवं एकसूत्रता । Universal Auspiciousness Harmony and integrality in all four dimensions (work, behaviour, thought, and realisation), all five statuses (individual, family, society, nation, and world) of humans, and the ten-tier family based self-governance orderliness. 28. महा मांगल्य सत्यानुभू त जागृ त ( भ्रम मुिक्त ) । The Greatest Auspiciousness Awakening as realisation in truth (liberation from delusion) 29. उपलिब्ध सहअिस्तत्व में स्था पत मूल्यों में अनुभू त । समाधान , समृद् ध अभय , सहअिस्तत्व सहज प...
[MVD p345 Chapter-18] ... प्रग त :- मानवत्व रूपी सहज व्यवस्था व समग्र व्यवस्था अथा त् प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था में भागीदारी । :- समाधान प्रधान समृद् ध सहज अपेक्षा प्र क्रया और प्रमाण । Progress ( pragati ): - Participation in the overall orderliness of human-ness, i.e. family based self-governance orderliness. : - Expectation, process and evidence of resolution and prosperity, with emphasis on resolution. बहन , उन्न त Bahan, Unnati बहन :- एकोदरीय ( एक पेट से पैदा होने वाली ) अथवा एकोदरवत् बहनें होती हैं । Sister ( bahan ): - One who is born fro...

----- TERM: self-governance -----
[MVD p18 ?] ...्य व्यवस्था में न व षमता ( सामरस्यता ) एवं एकसूत्रता । Universal Auspiciousness Harmony and integrality in all four dimensions (work, behaviour, thought, and realisation), all five statuses (individual, family, society, nation, and world) of humans, and the ten-tier family based self-governance orderliness. 28. महा मांगल्य सत्यानुभू त जागृ त ( भ्रम मुिक्त ) । The Greatest Auspiciousness Awakening as realisation in truth (liberation from delusion) 29. उपलिब्ध सहअिस्तत्व में स्था पत मूल्यों में अनुभू त । समाधान , समृद् ध अभय , सहअिस्तत्व सहज प्रमाण - यही स...
[MVD p19 ?] ...ompleteness in Education Consciousness development value education Technical education 31. परम्परा में सम्पूण ता मानवीय शक्षा संस्कार । मानवीय सं वधान । मानवीय प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था । Wholeness in Tradition Humane education sanskar Humane Constitution Humane family-based self-governance orderliness page- 19 ...
[MVD p345 Chapter-18] ... प्रग त :- मानवत्व रूपी सहज व्यवस्था व समग्र व्यवस्था अथा त् प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था में भागीदारी । :- समाधान प्रधान समृद् ध सहज अपेक्षा प्र क्रया और प्रमाण । Progress ( pragati ): - Participation in the overall orderliness of human-ness, i.e. family based self-governance orderliness. : - Expectation, process and evidence of resolution and prosperity, with emphasis on resolution. बहन , उन्न त Bahan, Unnati बहन :- एकोदरीय ( एक पेट से पैदा होने वाली ) अथवा एकोदरवत् बहनें होती हैं । Sister ( bahan ): - One who is born from the same wo...

----- TERM: exchange -----
[MVD p58 Chapter-4] ...rred to as the health perspective. लाभ :- श्रम से अ धक द्रव्य पाने की क्रया को लाभ अथवा लघु मूल्य के बदले गुरु मूल्य आदाय ही लाभ है । Profit ( labh ): - The activity of seeking more worth than the labour performed is referred to as the profit perspective. Getting higher value in exchange for lower value itself is profit. दीनता :- अपने दु : ख को दूसरों से दूर कराने हेतु जो आश्रय प्रवृ त्त है , उसकी दीनता संज्ञा है । Servility ( deenta ): - The tendency to seek refuge in others to alleviate one's misery is referred to as servility. दीनता अभावजन्य या अक्षमत...
[MVD p67 Chapter-4] ...नहीं है , पर हृदय तृिप्त से इिन्द्रय तृिप्त होती है । The sensory satisfaction doesn t necessarily lead to the heart's satisfaction, but the heart's satisfaction leads to sensory satisfaction. लघु मूल्य के बदले गुरु मूल्य का आदाय ( प्रािप्त ) लाभ है । Obtaining a higher value in exchange for a lower value is profit. लघु मूल्य के बदले गुरु मूल्य का प्रदाय तीन प रिस्थ तयों में होता है :- (1) ववशता वश , (2) स्वेच्छा वश तथा (3) अज्ञान वश । Higher value is offered in exchange for a lower value in three situations: (1) due to helplessness, (2) willingly, and (...
[MVD p260 Chapter-16] ...an tradition is in the form of the undivided society and universal orderliness. On the basis of study of their maxims and elaboration in conduct, the way in the State is recognised mainly in five dimensions: (1) education- sanskar , (2) justice-security, (3) production-work, (4) exchange-reserves, and (5) health-restraint. राज्य प्र क्रया में उक्त पाँचों व्यवस्थाएं साव भौ मकता के अथ मेें ही साथ क होना पाया जाता है । मानवीय शक्षा - संस्कार की सफलता अथ बोध होने के रूप मेें है । न्याय - सुरक्षा की सफलता संबंधों की पहचान , मूल्यों का नवा ह , मूल्यांकन पूव क ...
[MVD p265 Chapter-16] ...h the principle of producing more than the needs of family by way of circularity. 3. उत्पादन सुरक्षा , प्राकृ तक सन्तुलन को बनाये रखने के सद्धान्त से । Production Security: Through the principle of maintaining nature s balance. 4. व नमय सुरक्षा , श्रम नयोजन व व नमय सद्धान्त से । Exchange Security: Through the principle of utilisation of labour and exchange. 5. वद्याध्ययन संस्कार सुरक्षा , सहअिस्तत्व मूलक मानव केिन्द्रत चन्तन ज्ञान व ध से । Education -sanskar Security: Through knowledge of coexistence-based human-centric contemplation. 6. नै तक सुरक्षा , ...
[MVD p269 Chapter-16] ..., right-use, distribution, experimentation, and vocation to fulfil relationships and associations. 4. व नमय सुरक्षा - उत्पा दत वस्तुओें का श्रम मूल्य मूल्यांकन स हत उपभोक्ता को प्राप्त कराने वाले काय की व नमय संज्ञा है । व नमय सुरक्षा के लये नम्न आधार पर नी त नधा रण होना चा हए । Exchange Security : - Exchange refers to the activity of making the produced goods available to consumers based on the evaluation of human labour. The policy for exchange security needs to be determined based on the following: 1. लाभ - हा न मुक्त व नमय हेतु सहअिस्तत्ववादी दृिष्ट ...

----- TERM: balance -----
[MVD p22 ?] ... May there be balance in the rest of nature - A. Nagraj page- 22 ...
[MVD p24 ?] ...हुए , मैं परम प्रसन्नता का अनुभव कर रहा हूँ । Further, we need to study the basic fundamentals of the following: (1) For developing the capacity, ability and receptivity in every human to know humans as a unit in existence, and to live thereby, (2) For intactness of coexistence, balance, resolution, fearlessness and happiness, (3) For becoming capable of living with firmness towards righteous wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour, (4) For developing the well-defined path from inhumaneness to humaneness, humaneness to higher-hum...
[MVD p33 Chapter-1] ... is eternal , and this itself is knowledge. Law, regulation, balance, justice, dharma and ultimate truth are evident in coexistence only. o जड़ : - इकाईयाँ जो अपनी लंबाई , चौड़ाई , ऊँचाई की सीमा में क्रयाशील हैं । Insentient ( jad ): - The units that are active within the bounds of their length, width and height. o चैतन्य : - इकाईयाँ जो अपने...
[MVD p56 Chapter-4] ...समृद्ध एवं जागृ त पूण प्रमाण परंपरा के लए प्रयुक्त आवश्यकीय साधनों की समु चत साधन संज्ञा है । शरीर पोषण , संरक्षण व समाज ग त के लए अ प त , सम प त वस्तुयें समु चत साधन हैं । Adequate resources ( samuchit sadhan ): - Adequate resources refer to the resources necessary for ensuring balance in behaviour among humans, prosperity in experimentation and production, and evidence of awakening in the tradition. The adequate resources are the objects offered and devoted for bodily nourishment, protection, and societal participation. प्रयोग :- मानव की आवश्यकता के रू...
[MVD p67 Chapter-4] ... o आंदोलन :- हृदय के सम्वध न तथा संरक्षण की अक्षुण्णता इसके क्रया एवं ग त के संतुलन से बनी रहती है , इस क्रया एवं ग त का घट जाना या बढ़ जाना ही आंदोलन है । आंदोलन का संबंध मूलतः संवध न तथा संरक्षण से है । Turbulence ( andolan ): - The heart's wellbeing remains intact with balance in its activity and speed. Any deviation from this balance, due to increase or decrease in its activity and speed, constitutes a turbulence. Turbulence is related with the heart's wellbeing. o इिन्द्रय तृिप्त से हृदय तृिप्त आवश्यक नहीं है , पर हृदय तृिप्त से इिन्द्रय तृिप...

----- TERM: environment -----
[MVD p46 Chapter-3] ...inherent to all entities for the basic impulsion. मूल चेष्टा :- पदाथ के परमािण्वक िस्थ त में वातावरण के दबाव से मुक्त चेष्टा की मूल चेष्टा संज्ञा है । Basic impulsion ( mool cheshta ): - Basic impulsion refers to the activity in the atomic state of matter that is irrespective of environmental pressure. page- 46 ...
[MVD p70 Chapter-4] ... mistakes, demonstrating that humans tend to err due to delusion. Moreover, it has been observed that the same students become capable of performing correctly when they are provided with a humane environment and effective teaching. This proves that learning is an inherent need and opportunity for every human, and humans have the tendency to correct themselves despite being in animal consciousness. मानव ने अपनी आवश्यकता की पू त के लए ही उत्पादन काय एवं प्रयोग कया है । उत्प...
[MVD p85 Chapter-4] ... o अपने वातावरण में िस्थ त पूण - अपूण , रूप - गुण - स्वभाव - धम , योग - वयोग , क्रया - प्र क्रया , प रणाम - फल , ह्रास और वकास का संकेत ग्रहण दश न द्वारा ही दश क ने कया है । The perceiver receives the signals of their environment as complete-incomplete, form-properties-essential nature- dharma , union-separation, activity-process, result-consequence, and development-decline, through their worldview only. चैतन्य इकाई स्वयं जीवन पुंज - मन , वृ त्त , चत्त , बुद् ध व आत्मा का अध्ययन है । The study...
[MVD p94 Chapter-4] ...ागृ त प्र क्रया है । (2) There is an un-awakened person, the thirst for awakening arises in them upon coming in contact with another person who is awakened, and the process of awakening starts in them. This is the process for progression of awakening through inspiration from the environment. जागृ त की नरंतरता ही मानव परंपरा सहज म हमा है । The magnificence of human tradition lies in the continuity of awakening. जागृ त क्रम में संस्कार के दो भेद हैं :- There are two types of sanskar involved in the awakening progression: - o सुसंस्कार :- जागृ त योग्य प्रवृ...
[MVD p106 Chapter-5] ... that humans are united in the "right", and the root cause of conflicts is their being divided in the "wrong". य द उपरोक्त सद्धांत हृदयंगम हो जाये तो वश्व में सामािजकता के लए उपयुक्त वातावरण स्वयमेव उपिस्थत हो जाये । If the above principle is fully internalised then the adequate environment for sociality in the world would emerge on its own. मानव को पूण सुखी ( नभ्र म ) होने का प्रमाण ही बौद् धक समाधान और भौ तक समृद् ध सहज प्रमाण है । The evidence of the complete happiness (free from delusion) in humans is intellectual resolution and material prosperity. ...

----- TERM: participation in the overall -----
[MVD p9 ?] ...rder Knowledge Order (ii) Four planes in existence Biological plane Delusion plane Deific plane Divine plane (iii) and Development progression, Development Awakening progression, Awakening and the eternal grandeur of awakened human tradition as orderly living with human-ness and participation in the overall orderliness was understood. I accepted this as the essence of universal wellbeing and recognised the natural expectation for goodness in all humans. As a result, I have presented to humankind the formulation and elaboration of consciousness developmen...
[MVD p15 ?] ...परम्परा । The Refuge of Humans The tradition of evidence in the form of undivided society and universal orderliness (coexistence). 16. मानवीय व्यवस्था मानवीयता । मानवत्व स हत व्यवस्था , समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी । The Humane Orderliness Humaneness. Orderliness with human-ness, participation in the overall orderliness. 17. व्यिक्त में पूण ता क्रया पूण ता । आचरण पूण ता । Completeness in an Individual Activity completeness Conduct completeness 18. समाज में पूण ता page- 15 ...
[MVD p252 Chapter-16] ...d. In this way, trust is the key element that sustains the pleasantness of this relationship as well. Thus, maintaining consistent trust itself is the pinnacle of this relationship. 6. समझदार मानव परंपरा में व्यवस्था और समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी का संबंध :- The relationship of participation in the overall orderliness in the wise human tradition: - मानवत्व स हत व्यवस्था में व ध समायी रहती है । वधान नवा ह रूप में प्रमा णत होता है । व्यवस्था का धारक - वाहक जागृत मानव ही होता है । व्यवस्था में भागीदारी करने के लए मानव को जागृत होना रहना आवश्यक है । जागृ त ...
[MVD p257 Chapter-16] ...5. व्यवस्था , न्यायपूण नयम के समथ न व पालन से । The orderliness becomes successful through endorsing and adhering to the natural laws of justice. 6. प्रजा का जीवन समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी से तथा अनुशासन एवं नयम को स्वीकारने से । The life of citizens becomes successful through participation in the overall orderliness, and by discipline & acceptance of laws. 7. गुरु का जीवन अनुभव को प्रामा णकता पूव क अध्ययन कराने से । The life of a guru becomes successful through imparting study of realisation with authenticity. 8. शष्य का जीवन गुरु द्वारा कराये गये अध्...
[MVD p335 Chapter-18] ... :- व्यवस्था और समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी सहज उदय की ओर परावत न क्रया । Readiness ( tatparta ): - Activeness in awakening, awakening progression. : - Perseverance in production activity. : - Dedication in humane behaviour and conduct. : - Projection activity towards rise of participation in the overall orderliness. उत्साह :- उत्थान के लए साहस । :- व्यवस्था सहज सजगता । Enthusiasm ( utsah ): - Intrepidity for rising. : - Awareness of the orderliness. कृतज्ञता , सौम्यता Kritagyata, Saumyata कृतज्ञता :- िजस कसी की भी सहायता से उन्न त ( वकास और जागृ त ) ...

----- TERM: inherent orderliness -----
[MVD p11 ?] ...ledge Sentient and insentient nature saturated in Omnipotence. The countless sentient and insentient units are saturated in Omnipotence (Omnipresence). All units saturated in the Omnipresence (permeative and transparent) have form, properties, essential nature & dharma, and have inherent orderliness & participate in overall orderliness. 4. सद्धान्त श्रम - ग त - प रणाम । The Principle Effort - Motion - Result 5. उपदेश page- 11 ...

----- TERM: weight -----
[MVD p45 Chapter-3] ... पाषाण का वग करण कठोर एवं अकठोर भेद से है । The rocks are classified as hard and soft. o कठोर :- अ धक भार सहने वाले पाषाण की कठोर संज्ञा है । Hard ( kathor ) - Rocks that have the ability to withstand a greater amount of weight are referred to as hard. o अकठोर :- कम भार सहने वाले की अकठोर संज्ञा है । Soft ( akathor ): - Rocks that have the ability to withstand less weight or pressure are referred to as soft. म ण का वग करण करण श्रावी एवं करण ग्राही भेद से है । Gemstones are classified as reflectiv...
[MVD p46 Chapter-3] ... state are independent. भार , आकष ण से ; आकष ण , परस्परता से ; परस्परता , लघुता एवं गुरुता से ; लघुत्व एवं गुरुत्व , रचना एवं सापेक्ष ऊजा ओं से ; रचना एवं सापेक्ष ऊजा , क्रया से ; क्रया , पदाथ से और पदाथ का ह्रास एवं वकास सापेक्ष ऊजा के सदुपयोग एवं दुरूपयोग से सापे क्षत है । The weight depends on attraction; attraction depends on mutuality; mutuality depends on smallness or bigness; smallness or bigness depends on composition and relative energies; composition and relative energies depends on activity; activity depends on matter; and matter s development...
[MVD p91 Chapter-4] ... जाता है तथा गठनपूण हो जाता है । यही जीवन परमाणु है । जीवन अणु बंधन , भार बंधन से मुक्त तथा आशा बन्धन से युक्त होना ही गठनपूण ता का प्रमाण है । गठनपूण ता का प्रमाण स्वत्व स्वतंत्रता अ धकार के रूप में स्पष्ट हो जाता है । An evolving-constitution atom is with molecular-bondage and weight-bondage. However, when the contraction and expansion activity increases in this atom, it instantly breaks free from its group and attains constitutional completeness, becoming a jeevan atom. The evidence of constitutional completeness is the jeevan atom's liberation from m...
[MVD p117 Chapter-5] ... Further, as an atom irreversibly transitions into the sentient status upon development (constitutional completeness), it becomes free from the grouping of weight or molecular bonding. However, it becomes instantly associated with the hope-bondage. This hope manifests in the animal order merely to keep living (as the fear instinct). इससे ज्ञात होता है क वत मान में मानव िजस समुदाय में सामािजकता को पाना चाहता है उसके मूल में भय है ही ...
[MVD p347 Chapter-18] ...tive organs and Work organs मृदु - कठोर , वहन - संवहन Mridu-kathor, Vahan-Samvahan प रभाषा :- संवहन - मृदु :- (1) स्पश द्रय से कम भार व दबाव को सहने वाली वस्तुएँ । (2) संकुचन पूव क वहन करने वाली वस्तुएँ । Bearability-Soft ( samvahan-mridu ): - (1) The objects which can bear less weight or pressure than touch. (2) The objects which can bear weight by getting contracted. कठोर :- स्पश द्रय से अ धक भार व दबाव को सहने वाली वस्तुएं । पूण ता के वेदना स हत , ग त वहन करना । Hard ( kathor ): - The objects which can bear more weight or pressure than touch. शीत / उष...

----- TERM: gravitational -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: tendency to form -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: multicellular -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: organism -----
[MVD p8 ?] ... होना व परंपरा होना समझ में आया। In coexistence itself : - It is understood that on Earth, a physical form, the composition of compounds, along with the process of chemical reactions, resulted in the emergence of biological cells. These biological cells eventually formed complex organisms and, as the organisms evolved and became enriched, forests and vegetation appeared. From these biological cells, animal bodies were formed, including the human body, and their traditions were established. 14. सहअिस्तत्व में ही :- शरीर व जीवन के संयुक्त रुप में मानव परंप...

==================== SOURCE JV (171 pages) ====================


----- TERM: environment -----
[JV p35 ?] ...ate the entire content of the understanding into education. We made a curriculum to that end and experimented with it in a school. This school was at Govindpur in Bijnaur district, and it was a very good experience there. There is a long-standing belief of educationists that the environment affects the students, but in Govindpur, we experienced that the students affect their environment. We aspire to see this success on a large scale, and are making efforts towards this. The third plan is Family based Self-Governing System ( parivar moolak svarajya vyava...
[JV p76 ?] ...ws. Despite multiple reviews, the ideal education for humans remains undecided. In my observation, every human child is inherently inclined towards doing what is right and seeks justice. They speak the truth. However, as they grow up, they learn to lie because we have created an environment where living without lying seems impossible. Lies pervade the commercial world. State rule is founded on deception. Even education fails to nurture truth. What recourse is there for humans in such a situation? In this way, the daily routines and behaviour of people ge...
[JV p77 ?] ...sing and fulfilling them towards indivisible society and universal orderliness. Without knowing and believing the purpose, recognising and fulfilling go astray. For instance, we overlooked the purpose of our relationship with the Earth. We failed to understand the purpose of the environment. Consequently, we could not grasp the totality of the Earth and its environment. This lack of understanding led to the catastrophic collapse of our planet. It is imperative to understand unequivocally that if humankind is to survive on this Earth, then this proposal o...
[JV p96 ?] ...95 There's already a lot of noise about the environment, with estimates on who will survive and who will perish. Some countries hope to safeguard their nation, while some religions seek salvation for their followers. They find solace in the belief of a saviour, referred to as God, Paramatma, deity, avatar, or messiah. Such...
[JV p112 ?] ...111 People often say that the environment influences students, a notion I have always disagreed with. If the environment had such an overriding effect, how could I have succeeded in my exploration? Evidence from this school shows that children influence their families, and in turn, families influence their en...

----- TERM: participation -----
[JV p41 ?] ...a healthy and happy human existence. Therefore, for humans to live healthily and happily, they must adopt values and evaluation guided by awakened consciousness. The first step is understanding, the second step is honesty, the third step is responsibility, and the fourth step is participation. Humans need to evidence their understanding through these four steps. This understanding is categorised into three areas: knowledge of jeevan, knowledge of the holistic view of coexistence, and knowledge of humane conduct. I have already explained jeevan to you. Je...
[JV p45 ?] ...ability. Thus, we deduce that the combined form of jeevan and body is necessary for manifesting (evidencing) the understanding. It would neither occur solely by the body nor solely by jeevan. Evidence of understanding is exemplified through humans living in orderliness and their participation in universal orderliness, which is the embodiment of understanding itself. All of us want to live in orderliness, and this naturally stems from jeevan; it is not an external imposition upon us. In the course of understanding coexistence, it becomes clear that existe...
[JV p50 ?] ...49 Humans are sanskar-conforming units. Sanskar is the combined form of understanding, honesty, responsibility, and participation. Since wrongs are not acceptable to anyone, they do not become sanskar. No one accepts wrongs but remains ensnared by them. Even if a person has committed a thousand wrongs, those wrongs remain unacceptable to them. Because wrongs are not acceptable to anyone, no on...
[JV p71 ?] ...70 However, when we understand the practical purpose of our material accumulation, we learn that food, shelter and clothing are for nourishment and protection of body, while telecommunication and transportation are for social participation. All these things have become available, but humans haven t become satisfied based on comfort and accumulation. This is a huge irony. Two other activities of jeevan are deliberation ( tulan ) and analysis ( vishleshan ). Jeevan performs analysis activity based on it...
[JV p72 ?] ...71 accumulation need to be aligned with the human purpose i.e., towards the nourishment-protection of the body and social participation. Moving towards social participation leads to participation in an indivisible society and universal orderliness. As humans live based on these premises, they become capable of living with resolution-prosperity and happiness-peace. In this way, the goal of jeevan is ...

----- TERM: balance -----
[JV p21 ?] ...ers, then all of the flora, fauna, and humans that reside upon it are bound to suffer as well. You can very well imagine what kind of people would have envisaged health and happiness by wounding the planet. The silver lining in the cloud is that if we stop disturbing its natural balance, then it is reassuring to know that the resources on Earth's surface are abundant enough for all humans to live on it. Mistakes, crimes, revolts, and rebellions are the outcomes of human ignorance, not understanding, which is evident as the imbalance everywhere. Humans, a...
[JV p28 ?] ...27 into my personality. I didn t face any difficulty like I will not be able to live based on this understanding by way of harmony in jeevan and existence. I called this balance between talent and personality . I could meet this criterion truly and fully. Fourthly, I became social in behaviour . I started getting satisfaction within myself from becoming social. As a benefit, I was left with no complaints with the world. Now every moment I keep sc...
[JV p33 ?] ...ion. Citizens of all nations can accept it as their Constitution. This will lead to the indivisible society and universal system, eliminating the constant fear of war between factions in the world. As long as there are wars, humans will not be able to live without disturbing the balance of Earth, and they will use even more intellect to cause even bigger disturbances. We get an assessment of the scientific intellect when we see that a great deal of science and a great many scientists are currently devoted to the war effort, for which they get money and f...
[JV p52 ?] ...nding could not be established. Without such a tradition, how could humans learn to live in orderliness? In the absence of understanding, we have not managed to live judiciously with fellow humans and lawfully with the rest of nature (animal, biological, and material order) in a balanced way. This is why humans have continued to destroy their natural surroundings. ...
[JV p69 ?] ... to their imaginativeness and free will, but this search and exploration is meaningful only when it is for orderliness, and for achieving resolution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. Understanding leads humans to achieve: 1. Self-confidence 2. Respect for Excellence 3. Balance in Talent and Personality 4. Sociability in Behaviour 5. Self-reliance in Vocation These can be called merits. Humans become social with these merits. Evidencing understanding in living itself is learning . Only humans could become learned among all the existence. While t...

----- TERM: exchange -----
[JV p110 ?] ...lution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. The process for this is living in orderliness. Living in orderliness means participating in all five dimensions. These five dimensions are: 1. Education- Sanskar , 2. Justice-Security. 3. Health-Restraint, 4. Production-Work, 5. Exchange-Reserve In this way, by living orderly in a family and participating in the five dimensions, we become participants in the universal orderliness. This brings continuous joy, well-being, and indomitable courage to humans. Dharma follows justice. Dharma means the enlighten...
[JV p141 ?] ...he possibility of continuity. The present pressing issue is that crimes against the environment should stop. The human systems are in the form of: - 1. participation in education-sanskar 2. participation in justice-security 3. participation in production-work 4. participation in exchange-reserve 5. participation in health-restraint Participation in all these five systems itself is participation in orderliness. Such orderliness arises and is evidenced in each human upon awakening. This completes the summarised view of orderliness, which every wise person ...
[JV p153 ?] ...is highly praised, is essentially the science of currency notes and coins. We may possess all the currency notes and coins, but they cannot quench our thirst or fill our stomachs unless we obtain the desired goods with them. So, what is money? Money is merely a symbolic unit for exchange. Having a symbol is not the same as having the real thing. Believing that money can buy anything is madness. To resolve this issue, I propose that economic resources should be understood as body, mind, and wealth. Here, wealth refers to common aspirations (food, shelter,...
[JV p156 ?] ...155 labour and exchange based on labour. We should produce goods for our common and special aspirations based on this principle. The cyclical economic system is sustainable, natural, aligned with destiny, and co-existentially harmonious. Therefore, we should study it thoroughly, actualise it in...
[JV p158 ?] ...157 work, behaviour, production, and exchange. I am happy because of this, and so is my family. I see that every family wants to be happy. Every human being wants to be happy and wise; no one wants to be a fool. Even if you call a fool a fool , he will curse you and call you a fool in return. This happens because no...

----- TERM: organism -----
[JV p82 ?] ...ence. While those working in the form of molecules and biological cells have specific functions, the grandeur of coexistence is evident even in this. The coexistence of one cell ( pran kosha ) with another cell leads to multicellular forms, resulting in the formation of definite organisms. The method of formation is inherent in the pran sutra (genetic material) situated in the cell. This is called rachna vidhi (genetic code). These pran sutras have continuous search activity in them, which is evidenced by the multitude of diverse organisms we observe. Th...
[JV p146 ?] ...describing the evolution of species based on their bodily structure. For example, the body of an insect, a leech, a horse, a cow, and similarly, the body of a human. He made the skeletal structure the basis of his study. He tried to explain evolution in terms of how the bones in organisms have become longer and stronger, considering the human body as the most evolved and placing prior species in a chronological sequence. The Darwinian narrative about the evolution of the body has a few issues, but his description of humans is completely wrong. According ...

----- TERM: multicellular -----
[JV p82 ?] ...ery entity is protected, regulated, and energised by Omnipotence. While those working in the form of molecules and biological cells have specific functions, the grandeur of coexistence is evident even in this. The coexistence of one cell ( pran kosha ) with another cell leads to multicellular forms, resulting in the formation of definite organisms. The method of formation is inherent in the pran sutra (genetic material) situated in the cell. This is called rachna vidhi (genetic code). These pran sutras have continuous search activity in them, which is ev...

----- TERM: food for food -----
[JV p77 ?] ...oposal is that understanding is the right of every human. Every individual can research this. In my opinion, humanity can prosper and create its future moments with complete resolution. Biological cells decompose into the soil and turn into fertiliser. The natural arrangement of food for food is an intrinsic process in nature. Fertilisers are formed naturally this way. Biological cells are created, ...

----- TERM: orbit -----
[JV p92 ?] ...ivities of jeevan. 1. Atma : - atma is a part of jeevan which attains realisation in coexistence. I have seen it as the nucleus. It remains active as the nucleus of a constitutionally complete atom. All other activities of jeevan take place in its first, second, third and fourth orbits. There are only two activities in the nucleus of jeevan atom - realisation ( anubhav ) and authenticity ( pramanikta ) - which have been evidenced in me. ...
[JV p93 ?] ...92 2. Buddhi : - I have seen two activities: enlightenment ( bodh ) of realisation-evidence and resolve ( sankalp ) happening in the first orbit of jeevan. The resolve activity is for evidencing the realisation-evidence, which is called resoluteness ( ritambhara ). 3. Chitta : - The second orbit has two activities: contemplation ( chintan ) and visualisation ( chitran ). 4. Vritti : - The third orbit has two activit...
[JV p147 ?] ...y nor just jeevan is the basis of humans. Humans are combined expressions of jeevan and body. The development in atoms is meant for achieving constitutional completeness. Every atom is constituted of two or more atomic particles. Each atomic structure has a nucleus and particles orbiting around it, which naturally occurs in existence. These atoms contain at least two or more particles. Among many types of atoms, jeevan is one type. In a jeevan atom, there is no increase or decrease in the number of particles, which is why it possesses inexhaustible stren...

==================== SOURCE SB (298 pages) ====================


----- TERM: coexistence -----
[SB p5 ?] ...एकान्त , संग्रह , सु वधा और भोगवाद के स्थान पर सहअिस्तत्ववाद और व्यवस्था में समाधान , समृद् ध , अभय ( वत मान में वश्वास ) इं गत होने के अथ में यह प्रस्तुत है। In place of devotion renunciation, isolation, accumulation, comfort-seeking, and hedonism, this is presented to indicate coexistence and, within orderliness, resolution, prosperity, and fearlessness (trust in the present). वचार में समाधान , अनुभव में प्रमाण के रूप में प्रस्तुत है। This is presented in the form of resolution in thought and evidence in realisation. ब्रह्म सत्य , जगत् मथ्या के स्थान प...
[SB p7 ?] ...कृ त के साथ नरीक्षण , परीक्षण , सव क्षणपूव क वश्लेषण करता है। इसी क्रम में , यह वांङ्गमय , मानव कुल के सम्मुख प्रस्तुत हुआ। This book, in the form of a basic thesis, is presented under the title "Resolution Centred Materialism." It is a logical expression of facts in the form of coexistence as existence, aligned with human knowledge, wisdom, and science. The term 'ism' implies 'a dialogue,' which means the application of logic for the sake of purpose. Humans engage in dialogue among themselves in pursuit of completeness and analyse the rest of nature thr...
[SB p8 ?] ...er and ethics are still being searched for. So far, these have not been validated in any country or at any time. As an answer to these very questions in the form of resolution this book has been presented in order to communicate, as it is, the natural law, process and outcome of coexistence. समाधानात्मक भौ तकवाद मूलत : व्यवस्था केिन्द्रत अ भव्यिक्त , संप्रेषणा है। यह अिस्तत्व में पाए जाने वाले मनुष्येत्तर संपूण प्रकृ त का अध्ययन सहज नश्चय के आधार पर नभ र है। इस प्रस्तु त के पहले अिस्तत्व सहज वैभव को समझना एक आवश्यकता रही है , इसकी आपू त सहज संभव हो गई। R...
[SB p9 ?] ... प्रस्तुत हुआ है। दूसरी व ध से , अिस्तत्व ही सहअिस्तत्व रूप में वैभ वत है। The meaning of resolution is in the form of answers of why and how. The entire resolution in human behaviour as law, regulation, balance, justice and dharma (universal orderliness) is the manifestation of coexistence as the ultimate truth. It is eternally ubiquitous. Ubiquitous means, it is always available and close to all. Closeness is evident through coexistence. The meaning of coexistence is to be with one another. This is inherent to the countless units in the Omnipresence. R...
[SB p10 ?] ... intends to study the purpose of existence, coexistence, development, awakening, and the physicochemical composition-decomposition. - ए . नागराज श्री भजनाश्रम , श्री नम दांचल अमरकंटक , िजला - अनूपपुर ( मध्यप्रदेश ) A Nagraj Shree Bhajnashram, Shree Narmadanchal, Amarkantak, District Anuppur (Madhya Pradesh). ...

----- TERM: development -----
[SB p9 ?] ...form of coexistence. The fundamental meaning of coexistence is the inseparability of the countless individual entities within the omnipresent reality. Each entity is manifest as insentient or sentient. Each human is a joint form of insentient and sentient. The study of an atom s development and its grandeur in the sentient status is done in this book itself. The human body composed of cells gets formed in the womb. This book ...
[SB p10 ?] ... intends to study the purpose of existence, coexistence, development, awakening, and the physicochemical composition-decomposition. - ए . नागराज श्री भजनाश्रम , श्री नम दांचल अमरकंटक , िजला - अनूपपुर ( मध्यप्रदेश ) A Nagraj Shree Bhajnashram, Shree Narmadanchal, Amarkantak, District Anuppur (Madhya Pradesh). ...
[SB p11 ?] ... अनुक्रम णका अध्याय पृष्ठ संख्या 1. समाधान और द्वन्द्व 1 Resolution and Conflict 2. मानव स्वरूप का इ तहास 7 History of Humans 3. समाधानात्मक भौ तकवाद 22 Resolution Centred Materialism 4. अिस्तत्व एवं अिस्तत्व में परमाणु का वकास 24 Existence and development of atom in existence 5. अिस्तत्व में परमाणु का वकास 38 Development of atom in existence सारणी - ज्ञानावस्था के पाँच मानव 54 Table - The five categories of humans in knowledge order सारणी - प्रकृ त सहज चार अवस्थाएँ ( परस्पर पूरक ) 55 Table - The four orders of nature (...
[SB p13 Chapter-1] ...o prominence, materialists began to argue that duality is inherent in matter itself. Those who advocate for duality consider themselves to be very scientific. They believe that science is systematic study, essentially because it is logical. In this way, materialists believe that development happens by way of struggle, whereas idealists believe that the world was created by God s grace. द्वन्द्व कहने के मूल में अंतर वरोध और बाह्य वरोध नामक दो बातों की स्वीकारते हुए , अंत व रोध को वकास का आधार बताया गया। बाह्य वरोध को संघष पूव क स्व - वैभव अथवा स्वयं की ता...
[SB p14 Chapter-1] ... Each unit moves towards development in its natural state and decline in its excited state. 4. परस्पर नैस ग कता में ही आवे शत ग त और स्वभाव ग त का होना स्पष्टत : पाया जाता है। The excited state and natural state are clearly found only in the unit s mutuality. जैसे यह धरती शून्याकष ण व ध से अपनी स्वभा वक ...

----- TERM: atom -----
[SB p9 ?] ... orderliness . In this sequence, soil, stones, gems, metals, atoms, molecules, all bodies formed from molecules, the plant world found on the surface of any such body, and the animal world all stand validated through this very formulation. Its validation in the human being still remains. In order to make this studyable, Resolution-centred ...
[SB p11 ?] ... अनुक्रम णका अध्याय पृष्ठ संख्या 1. समाधान और द्वन्द्व 1 Resolution and Conflict 2. मानव स्वरूप का इ तहास 7 History of Humans 3. समाधानात्मक भौ तकवाद 22 Resolution Centred Materialism 4. अिस्तत्व एवं अिस्तत्व में परमाणु का वकास 24 Existence and development of atom in existence 5. अिस्तत्व में परमाणु का वकास 38 Development of atom in existence सारणी - ज्ञानावस्था के पाँच मानव 54 Table - The five categories of humans in knowledge order सारणी - प्रकृ त सहज चार अवस्थाएँ ( परस्पर पूरक ) 55 Table - The four orders of nature (mutually comple...
[SB p14 Chapter-1] ...s the foundational cause for expression of these orders. The principle is: "Each unit in its natural state achieves further development or attains its next level of being, as the natural state provides all conducive naturalness, environment, tradition, etc." If a unit whether an atom, molecule, plant, animal, or human finds a suitable environment, naturalness and mutuality, it exhibits changes that lead to its greater qualitative and quantitative abundance. इसे और भी स्पष्टता से देखें क मानव जन्म से ही अथा त् शरीर यात्रा के समय से ही न्याय का याचक , सही ...
[SB p15 Chapter-1] ...ess with ness under conducive conditions. The concept of conducive conditions differs between humans and the rest of nature. For example, material order units, even when subjected to an excited environment created by humans, can still be in a state of development progression. An atom in its natural state is ready to absorb particles expelled from another atom in an excited state. Therefore, in the material order, the excited state can also be complementary. In contrast, humans, in their excited state of delusion, not only damage themselves but ...
[SB p16 Chapter-1] ... also cause harm to others. In the material order, the natural state and excited state are mutually complementary until they achieve full enrichment in themselves with all kinds of atoms, molecules, and molecular forms. प्राणावस्था में वनस्प तयाँ अपनी स्वभावग त में रहने के लए सानुकूल वातावरण चाहती है , जो पदाथा वस्था से भन्न है। वनस्प तयाँ मूलत : बीजानुषंगीय व्यवस्था की अ भव्यिक्त है। वनस्प तयों के लए सानुकूल वातावरण प्रधान रूप में ऋतु संतुलन है। ऋतु संतुलन...

----- TERM: value -----
[SB p8 ?] ...as the carrier and bearer of science based on empirical evidence. This dialectical materialism has given rise to a sex-obsessed psychology, leading us to incorporate indulgence-obsessed sociology and profit-obsessed economics into education. In this very dialectical wilderness - values, character and ethics are still being searched for. So far, these have not been validated in any country or at any time. As an answer to these very questions in the form of resolution this book has been presented in order to communicate, as it is, the natural law, process ...
[SB p12 ?] ...कृ त और सृजनशीलता 164 Artificiality, Nature and Creativity 9) संकरीकरण और परंपरा 171 Hybridization (Crossbreeding) and Tradition 10) उद्योग , आवश्यकता , संबंध और संतुलन 177 Industry, Need, Relationship and Balance 11) भय , प्रलोभन या मूल्य और मूल्यांकन 199 Fear and Temptation or Values and Evaluation 12) भौ तकता , अ भव्यिक्त , संस्कार और व्यवस्था 210 Material Nature, Humane Expression, Sanskar and System ...
[SB p50 Chapter-4] ... existence is in the form of coexistence, entire beingness exhibits complementarity, mutual recognition, and impression in their mutuality, manifesting in the form of reciprocity. Entire beingness implies the essentiality of units in every plane and order. Essentiality refers to value. This implies that the ultimate dharma (existence) is identical in every unit, making it universal and perpetual. It is values that are reciprocated and mutually recognised, as complementarity, mutual recognition, and impression occur only in mutuality. Additionally, every ...
[SB p64 Chapter-4] ... through its reflection. From this it becomes clear that the entire physical and chemical world comes into recognition in the course of projection through sensory contact. Whereas, values and existence - or essential nature and dharma - are recognised only in reflection. As a result, the way of fulfilling these comes about. This means, the recognising and fulfilling of the insentient and the sentient world is through the balance of cognisance and sensitivit...
[SB p65 Chapter-4] ... शिक्तयों के रूप में , स्वभाव की पहचान शिक्तयों के सद् व्यय के रूप में होती हैं। धम की पहचान अिस्तत्व , पुिष्ट , आशा और आनन्द के रूप में स्पष्ट होती है। The art of living, rooted in the awakening of jeevan and its magnificence, fundamentally lies in recognising relationships and values. The dignity of this art is manifest in the fulfilment of these relationships and values. This process embodies resolution and authenticity across all dimensions, perspectives, and directions of human existence. Through awakening, one recognises and fulfils absolute truth ...

----- TERM: tradition -----
[SB p7 ?] ...m of evidence. The acceptances related to the naming of this exposition are natural to the human being; hence they are universal. It is also observed that even when such acceptances exist mentally, their evidence in responsible conduct has necessarily remained different in human tradition as the very title itself indicates. ...
[SB p8 ?] ...या और फलन है , इसी के यथावत संप्रे षत करने के क्रम में इस पुस्तक को प्रस्तुत कया है। We are already familiar with "Dialectical Materialism". Humans understand dialectic as a form of struggle, which has not been accepted by the human race for all time. On the contrary, within the tradition an expectation of resolution is seen to be inherent. At the same time, Dialectical Materialism has been presented before intellectuals as the foundational basis of scientific education. The proof of this lies in the fact that the entire body of scientific formulations i...
[SB p12 ?] ... human, identification of great humans 6) प्रकाशन और प्र त बम्ब 154 Exposition and Image 7) गुण , प्रभाव व बल 158 Properties, Effect and Force 8) कृ त्रमता , प्रकृ त और सृजनशीलता 164 Artificiality, Nature and Creativity 9) संकरीकरण और परंपरा 171 Hybridization (Crossbreeding) and Tradition 10) उद्योग , आवश्यकता , संबंध और संतुलन 177 Industry, Need, Relationship and Balance 11) भय , प्रलोभन या मूल्य और मूल्यांकन 199 Fear and Temptation or Values and Evaluation 12) भौ तकता , अ भव्यिक्त , संस्कार और व्यवस्था 210 Material Nature, Humane Expression, Sanskar an...
[SB p14 Chapter-1] ...this. The natural state of the Earth is the foundational cause for expression of these orders. The principle is: "Each unit in its natural state achieves further development or attains its next level of being, as the natural state provides all conducive naturalness, environment, tradition, etc." If a unit whether an atom, molecule, plant, animal, or human finds a suitable environment, naturalness and mutuality, it exhibits changes that lead to its greater qualitative and quantitative abundance. इसे और भी स्पष्टता से देखें क मानव जन्म से ही अथा त् शरीर या...
[SB p15 Chapter-1] ...ष्ट कया गया है क इसके लए पहले से , मानव परंपरा में अिस्तत्व मूलक मानव केिन्द्रत चंतन रुपी अिस्तत्व दश न , जीवन ज्ञान सहज ऐसा अ धकार स्था पत हुआ रहता है तभी ऐसी सानुकूल प रिस्थ त को स्था पत करना संभव हो पाता है। The above are also the elements of conducive conditions in the human tradition. It becomes possible to establish such conducive conditions when the human tradition has attained the capability of holistic view of existence in the form of existence-based human-centric contemplation, and knowledge of jeevan. अभी तक मानव परंपरा में ऐसी िस्थ त नहीं बन ...

----- TERM: environment -----
[SB p13 Chapter-1] ...t, whereas external contradictions are viewed as a means of demonstrating one's own greatness or power through struggle. However, a thorough examination of reality reveals contrary facts. For example: 1. प्रत्येक एक अपने वातावरण स हत संपूण है। Each unit is a whole along with its environment. 2. प्रत्येक एक अपने त्व स हत व्यवस्था है और समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदार है। Each unit is orderliness with its ness and participates in overall orderliness. 3. प्रत्येक एक अपनी स्वभाव ग त में वकास की ओर और आवे शत ग त में ह्रास की ओर ग तशील होता है। ...
[SB p14 Chapter-1] ...erstand) all this. The natural state of the Earth is the foundational cause for expression of these orders. The principle is: "Each unit in its natural state achieves further development or attains its next level of being, as the natural state provides all conducive naturalness, environment, tradition, etc." If a unit whether an atom, molecule, plant, animal, or human finds a suitable environment, naturalness and mutuality, it exhibits changes that lead to its greater qualitative and quantitative abundance. इसे और भी स्पष्टता से देखें क मानव जन्म से ही अ...
[SB p15 Chapter-1] ... Here s another illustration to clarify this further. From the time of birth, a human being inherently seeks justice, desires to act correctly, and speaks the truth. This is the natural state of a child. When the conducive conditions, environment, naturalness and mutuality are established, the following traits naturally manifest in the child: 1. न्याय प्रदा यक क्षमता , The capacity to deliver justice. 2. सही काय - व्यवहार करने की योग्यता तथा The ability to perform work and behaviour correctly, and 3. सत्यबोध ह...
[SB p16 Chapter-1] ... अव ध के कम या अ धक होने से प्र तकूलता प्रमा णत होती है अथा त् वनस्प तयाँ मर जाती हैं। वास्त वक रूप में उनके रचनाक्रम और वैभव क्रम में प्र तकूलता उसकी वरचना के रूप में होना देखा जाता है। इसी घटना को मरना भी कहा जाता है। The vegetations in the biological order require a conducive environment to remain in their natural state, which differs from the conducive environment needed by the material order. Vegetations are fundamentally an expression of the seed-conformance order. The primary conducive environment for vegetations is climatic balance, which means h...
[SB p17 Chapter-1] ...the balance of these five essential elements is crucial to preserving the inherent natural state of all biological creations. Consequently, while the biological order and all its creations appear to be more developed than the material order, the co-existential complementarity of environment and natural elements is imperative for their continued existence. इस वश्लेषण में भी अंत व रोध बाह्य वरोध के स्थान पर अंतस बधों में संतुलन बाह्य संबंधों में भी संतुलन इनके संयोग में सामन्जस्यता प्रमा णत होती हैं। यह समाधान का साक्षी है। ऊपर कए गए वश्लेषण से यह भी स्पष्...