
==================== SOURCE JV ====================


----- TERM: coexistence -----
[JV p3 ?] ...2 this state, he pursued 'samyama' . Baba ji understood existence as coexistence as a result of this pursuit. In coexistence, he understood humans as a combined form of jeevan and body. The realisation of the sentient and insentient nature being saturated in the omnipresent power (Omnipotence), which we call by names such as Go...
[JV p26 ?] ... satisfaction in living accordingly, you will naturally feel compelled to impart this understanding to others. The proof of our comprehension lies in our ability to convey it to others; this is the litmus test of our wisdom. My realisation is from having seen coexistence. Humans can experience prosperity in coexistence by producing more than the needs of their families. This understanding shall manifest itself only as resolution in every aspect of behaviour. I have witnessed the interconnectedness of these three, a...
[JV p30 ?] ...29 I have tried to describe it here. The erstwhile ideologies are struggle-centred or conflict-centred materialism. While in the state and motion of coexistence, there is no fight, no revolt, and no snatching or robbing - instead, there is mutual complementariness, celebration, joyousness, and continuous progression. This is what I have tried to explain here. Literature is literally just words! According t...
[JV p31 ?] ...hlighted the need for its understanding. How will humans understand themselves without understanding existence, of which they are a part? Therefore, understanding existence is essential. All units of nature are in Omnipresence; this itself is the testimony of coexistence. If we overlook the fact that existence is coexistence, it results in nothing apart from problems and suffering. Whatever revolts, rebellions, exploitations, and wars that humans have committed until now, these all were contrary to the ...
[JV p32 ?] ...31 principles of coexistence. It is ironic that even after doing all these, we desired and hoped to achieve what is right. Our hope remained unfulfilled, and we kept facing the consequences of our actions. We laughed and cried amidst this. When one family or community kills so...
[JV p41 ?] ...40 existence, whereas the creation of bombs disrupts coexistence. Existence naturally implies coexistence, and any deviation from this natural order inevitably encounters resistance. Commerce, similarly, has become profit-driven, perpetually pursuing 'more.' One person thinks they have 'less,' another 'more,' le...

----- TERM: saturated -----
[JV p3 ?] ...2 this state, he pursued 'samyama' . Baba ji understood existence as coexistence as a result of this pursuit. In coexistence, he understood humans as a combined form of jeevan and body. The realisation of the sentient and insentient nature being saturated in the omnipresent power (Omnipotence), which we call by names such as God, Truth, Brahma, etc., also happened. The entire orderliness in existence was understood. He saw that all of nature is submerged, soaked, and surrounded by Omnipotence (Paramat...
[JV p45 ?] ... of understanding itself. All of us want to live in orderliness, and this naturally stems from jeevan; it is not an external imposition upon us. In the course of understanding coexistence, it becomes clear that existence itself is coexistence, because nature, saturated (immersed, soaked, and surrounded) in Omnipotence (Omnipresence), constitutes the entire existence. Nature is in the form of entities that can be counted. Humans are the ones who count. The countable entities include all sentient and insentient natur...
[JV p51 ?] ...rogression, development and awakening. The method for understanding all these points is inherent only in humans. The potential for this understanding is also inherent only in humans. The fundamental issue in understanding existence is that existence is nature saturated in Omnipotence. Nature and Omnipotence are found to be thoroughly intertwined with one another, eternally inseparable, continuously extant and present. There is no method to separate nature from Omnipresence, nor is there any purpose in such separati...
[JV p115 ?] ...iefs, and they lack universality. The third point is the ‘truth’. What is the truth? Truth is to understand existence in the form of coexistence. One understands existential orderliness upon understanding truth. Existence is studied only in the form of nature saturated in Omnipotence. Humans and the rest of nature are complementary to one another. As one develops the lifestyle according to this understanding, it only results in humane orderliness. Once this is understood, we will live only in justice, we will live ...
[JV p127 ?] ...n systems? All this falls under sociology, which is a subject of study in itself. Humans can live very nicely while trusting the present. Existence neither increases nor decreases, therefore we can recognise existence in the form of the ultimate truth. Nature saturated in Omnipotence itself is existence. The present can never be destroyed. We are intellectually unresolved in the present because of our inability to live in orderliness. We therefore escape to the past and the future (in our memory), which makes us fr...

----- TERM: submerged -----
[JV p3 ?] ... realisation of the sentient and insentient nature being saturated in the omnipresent power (Omnipotence), which we call by names such as God, Truth, Brahma, etc., also happened. The entire orderliness in existence was understood. He saw that all of nature is submerged, soaked, and surrounded by Omnipotence (Paramatma). From the year 1976 onwards, he started sharing his realisations with those who came to him. During this period, notable scientists such as Dr. C.V. Raman and Dr. Homi Bhabha, the president of the At...
[JV p18 ?] ...17 reality that pervades everywhere, which anyone can understand in a moment. Each unit of nature is soaked, surrounded and submerged in this second reality. This can be called Omnipresence. There are two kinds of entities (units) – insentient and sentient. Sentient entities mean animal-kind and humankind, and insentient entities mean material order and biological order. Insentient...
[JV p31 ?] ...between this Earth and other planets. It’s also there between one solar system and another, just as it is between one galaxy and another. Space is uniform in all dimensions. Therefore, we come to know that this reality is omnipresent. All entities (units) are submerged, surrounded, and soaked in this omnipresent reality. This itself comes into human realisation first. After that, one realises their own being. Had this space not been between you and me, it wouldn’t have been possible for me to realise your existence...
[JV p92 ?] ...d solely by our capacity to endure hardship. But do these proclamations hold any truth? They serve as the foundation of numerous falsehoods. Our concepts of family, education, business, and more are built upon these falsehoods. Consequently, we find ourselves submerged beneath layers of deceit. While some strive to break free, the majority remain ensnared. We desire to change education to overcome this predicament. We are now ready to evidence the ten activities of jeevan. Every human has a tacit acceptance of jeev...

----- TERM: energised -----
[JV p81 ?] .... Humans must evidence coexistence. The atoms and molecules too exist in orderliness while recognising one another. All the planets, celestial bodies, vegetation, and minerals are in orderliness, evidencing coexistence. At the fundamental level, all units are energised within themselves to evidence coexistence. This existence is a wonderful manifestation of being energised only. All atomic particles, all atoms, and all molecules ...
[JV p82 ?] ..., minerals, and animals that surround us have manifested their grandeur through coexistence alone. They thrive through the way of coexistence. Without coexistence, nothing would be protected. At the fundamental level, every entity is protected, regulated, and energised by Omnipotence. While those working in the form of molecules and biological cells have specific functions, the grandeur of coexistence is evident even in this. The coexistence of one cell ( pran kosha ) with another cell leads to multicellular forms,...
[JV p85 ?] ... truly are. Before this, idealism presented God as the one responsible for deliverance. I have seen God; He does not have a factory for deliverance. In what form did I see God? I saw God as Omnipresence. I saw God as the absolute energy in which every unit is energised. I have seen that every unit in Omnipresence is in coexistence. What more is there to be seen in God? If there is anything more, you are welcome to explore and reveal it to the world! You are free to explore. What I have seen and understood has alrea...

----- TERM: definite conduct -----
[JV p47 ?] ...all. For universal happiness, humans must become wise. Understanding can be instilled in everyone. The first step is understanding existence, which consists of four orders. Material Order : This includes soils, stones, gems, metals, etc., all of which exhibit definite conduct. Biological order : This encompasses all trees, plants, vegetation, medicinal herbs, etc., which also demonstrate their respective definite conducts. Animal Order : This includes all animals and birds, excluding humans, and these too show inhe...
[JV p48 ?] ...ut understanding and resolution. The material order is regulated by structural conformity, while the biological order is regulated by seed conformity. The animal order is regulated by species conformity. The evidence of regulation manifests as orderliness and definite conduct. Every unit of nature, except humans, exhibits definite conduct. Humans also require definite conduct, which they achieve through sanskar-conformity. Sanskar, manifested as developed consciousness, is the basis of understanding. Humane conduct...
[JV p113 ?] ... our relationships, values are fulfilled, and mutual satisfaction results. Orderliness is a perpetual truth in coexistence. Each unit in existence has inherent orderliness. For example - oak-ness is the inherentness in an oak tree. A peepal tree maintains its definite conduct with all its fruits, seeds and leaves exhibiting peepal’s properties, intrinsic nature and dharma. In the same way, the conduct of entire units of plant world and animal world is definite, each exhibiting their respective definite conducts. Th...

----- TERM: regulated and conserved -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: established value -----
[JV p43 ?] ...re was a crucial need to understand the value of humans, yet we allocated value to everything else instead. We clung to the value of those things where profit could be made, while neglecting the value of humanity. By comprehending human values, jeevan values, established values, and civic values, concerns about profit and loss vanish. We would then live based on the usefulness ...
[JV p139 ?] ...ch we attain mastery, we become capable of evidencing and meaningfulness to the same extent. Thereby, we start experiencing values. Jeevan evaluates the values that emanate from itself. Object value is spread everywhere, while jeevan values, human values, and established values are inherent to jeevan, and jeevan itself performs their evaluation. It is such a natural and magnificent activity! No external instrument is needed for this evaluation. It is about examining the self, by the self, and for the self. Everyone...

----- TERM: relationship -----
[JV p28 ?] ...getting satisfaction within myself from becoming social. As a benefit, I was left with no complaints with the world. Now every moment I keep scrutinizing the meaningfulness of my actions. I live meaningfully by fulfilling duties and responsibilities in all my relationships. Fifthly, I attained prosperity . Though I was born in a hardworking family and I knew how to do physical labour and seva , but I didn’t then really understand the meaning of prosperity. The meaning of prosperity was understood now. We produce mo...
[JV p40 ?] ...39 developed consciousness (humane consciousness). Success lies in establishing orderliness with jeevan, its relationships, its satisfaction, and its goals at the centre. If we neglect jeevan and construct systems solely for the welfare of the body, it will only lead to disorder. What 'feels' right for the body is not always correct. The body, as an entity, is not et...
[JV p43 ?] ...se upon understanding. In my view, humans want this very knowledge, and they want to live according to this only. We can live happily only in the togetherness of all. “Nothing is isolated” – that is the principle. Attempting to find happ iness by severing our relationship with the Earth is destined to fail. One cannot find happiness by forsaking their relationship with water. If we cannot become happy by leaving the relationship with material things, then how will we become happy by leaving the relationship with je...
[JV p55 ?] ...t, every individual can live with rightfully owned wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour. Right-use and protection of body, mind and wealth are ensured by such living. When these elements are harmonised, justice - manifested through relationships, values, evaluation, and mutual satisfaction - becomes self-evident. In this way, humane conduct is explained as the combined form of values, character, and ethics. The right-use and protection of resources in the form of body, mind, and wealth c...
[JV p56 ?] ...55 share the space. However, if a familiar person enters, they may even offer their seat willingly. Hence, the recognition of relationships is paramount. The study of relationships is guided by their respective purposes; nurturing defines the mother-child relationship, while protection characterises the father-child relationship. Once all the relationships are recognised, humans no l...
[JV p57 ?] ...od comes from it. After seeking refuge in the 'real mother and father,' no human is found. So, whose good will occur and where? These narratives serve no real purpose. It is through wisdom that the purpose of humanity becomes clear. Purpose is inherent in all relationships. But what is this purpose? It is solely about achieving resolution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. The purpose of all relationships is intricately linked to these goals, thus forming a tradition aligned with them. This tradition can o...

----- TERM: justice -----
[JV p33 ?] ...32 there is justice in their behaviour with other humans. Humane conduct is the focus here, which can be adopted as a model code of conduct for the nation. Citizens of all nations can accept it as their Constitution. This will lead to the indivisible society and universal...
[JV p34 ?] ...umans are never the same, but jeevan exists in the same form in all humans. The strengths and powers of jeevan are the same, and the goal of every jeevan is the same. Jeevan wants to become awakened, and awakening is its goal. Every human seeks resolution and justice. All of us can verify this fact. There is no part of the body that is awaiting or desiring justice, nor is there any part that seeks resolution. Similarly, no part of the body desires prosperity, even though every human naturally yearns for justice, re...
[JV p35 ?] ...34 justice, dharma, and truth for jeevan’s satisfaction. This, in a nutshell, is the task ahead. The Jeevan Vidya Plan has been presented based on this understanding, which turned into a program. The stalwarts of science and those who don’t know any science, the ...
[JV p52 ?] ...f human tradition? It is to evidence resolution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. Coexistence means living with complementarity. Fearlessness is trust in the present. Prosperity is producing in excess of our family’s needs. Resolution is living with justice. Human endeavours through idealism and materialism could not achieve the understanding. The root cause of this is our failure to understand existence in the form of coexistence. We erred in understanding jeevan and its awakening within coexistence, as ...
[JV p53 ?] ...52 Humans have not been able to find justice anywhere. When the chief justices of high courts were questioned about it, they responded, 'We do not administer justice; we merely render judgments.' If the judicial courts themselves are unaware of justice, can they truly be called halls of justice? ...
[JV p55 ?] ...In the realm of humane conduct, every individual can live with rightfully owned wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour. Right-use and protection of body, mind and wealth are ensured by such living. When these elements are harmonised, justice - manifested through relationships, values, evaluation, and mutual satisfaction - becomes self-evident. In this way, humane conduct is explained as the combined form of values, character, and ethics. The right-use and protection of resources in the for...

----- TERM: trust -----
[JV p52 ?] ...ion grows or diminishes, it has nothing to do with the attainment of understanding. What is the purpose of human tradition? It is to evidence resolution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. Coexistence means living with complementarity. Fearlessness is trust in the present. Prosperity is producing in excess of our family’s needs. Resolution is living with justice. Human endeavours through idealism and materialism could not achieve the understanding. The root cause of this is our failure to understand existen...
[JV p53 ?] ...hieved. Therefore, justice is the backbone of humaneness. Justice is first evidenced in a wise family, then in society, and finally across the whole Earth as universal orderliness. Living justly ensures that humans remain satisfied, happy, and resolved. Their trust in the present becomes firmer, and their behaviour continuously refines. All of these are accomplished spontaneously by living with justice. It is said that one achieves these through the accumulation of virtue, which I now understand to mean wisdom. In ...
[JV p58 ?] ...urces are rightly used, they become secure, and whatever purpose they are used for also becomes secure. This is what we mean by right-use and security. When we allocate our resources—body, mind, and wealth—towards resolution, prosperity, and orderliness, with trust in the present and fostering coexistence, they become secure. ...
[JV p62 ?] .... Self-governance is the self-inspired orderly living, which is the manifestation of humane conduct. The grandeur of human awakening is in realising their relationships at the level of individual, family, society, nature, and universal orderliness. We come to trust in the present only through the process of realising values in our relationships. Without recognising our relationships, ...
[JV p63 ?] ...living purposefully. The harmony with humans is as a relationship, values, evaluation and mutual satisfaction. We choose satisfaction over dissatisfaction. Every human, in the anticipation of satisfaction, evidences coexistence through resolution, prosperity, trust in the present, and living in orderliness. Existence is the ultimate truth, since this itself has eternal continuity in the form of coexistence. Coexistence is continuously in effect, as a result there is emergence of development and awakening. The devel...
[JV p80 ?] ...f realisation is inherently present in every human being? It is incredible that all of us have been keeping faith in such assurances. Now, we must consider whether to have faith in assurances or to rely on evidence. From my early days, my tendency has been to trust on the basis of evidence, so I was naturally encouraged by this approach. My search for evidence led me to ...

----- TERM: respect -----
[JV p6 ?] ... original Hindi text on the left as a reference and translated English text on the right. This book has undergone a thorough peer review for more than a year by Shree Puneet Chawla (Delhi), Shree Sanjeev Chopra (Delhi), and Shree Surendra Pal (Raipur). I have respect and gratitude for their understanding, commitment and consistent effort, which has helped in improving this book’s accuracy and readability. All of us in the review team feel that our understanding has improved from this collaborative exercise. We feel...
[JV p21 ?] ...Humans will have to become wise whenever they decide to avert this problem. There is no other way. Crimes cannot be controlled through lack of understanding, constitutional means or otherwise; a crime is still a crime. All the nations on this Earth have their respective Constitutions. Each of these Constitutions has three main agendas and a common theme - ‘Power-Centric Rule’ . Power-Centric Rule gets implemented in the form of three activities - stopping one mistake by making another mistake, stopping one crime by...
[JV p27 ?] ...mane conduct, I achieved a state which I will now describe to you. I attained confidence within myself after understanding. I didn’t have to exert any effort for it. I started verifying this confidence in all aspects of my living as well. In the same way, the respect for excellence also became feasible. I could evaluate excellence, which naturally results in having respect for it. We cannot respect what we do not evaluate. Thirdly, I comfortably integrated this understanding ...
[JV p29 ?] ...ame of the fourth part is – The Holistic view of Human Realisation ( Manav Anubhav Darshan ). In this manner, I wrote the entire Madhyasth Darshan in four parts. There are generative, degenerative and mediative powers or motions in existence, which have their respective outcomes. Among these, establishing the magnificence of mediative strength and power is the wonderful goal of humankind. I too was very amazed upon seeing this. Anyone who has gotten its sense - whether scientist, scholar or commoner - becomes amaze...
[JV p40 ?] ...wisdom to make decisions based on jeevan. Jeevan is in the same form in all humans. Its powers and strengths are inexhaustible because the jeevan atom remains unchanged in its constitution. The strength and power of an entity manifest in its state and motion, respectively. Every human acknowledges the continuity of their being, which is due to presence of jeevan within them. Being itself is presence; the study of reality occurs only in the present. Similarly, jeevan exists in all humans in the same form, with ident...
[JV p47 ?] ...nce, which consists of four orders. Material Order : This includes soils, stones, gems, metals, etc., all of which exhibit definite conduct. Biological order : This encompasses all trees, plants, vegetation, medicinal herbs, etc., which also demonstrate their respective definite conducts. Animal Order : This includes all animals and birds, excluding humans, and these too show inherent orderliness. Knowledge Order : This comprises only humans, who are yet to achieve orderliness. Consider this: the most developed ord...

----- TERM: recognis -----
[JV p17 ?] ...16 of sociology. In this way, I found answers to both my questions. The constitution shall provide the code of conduct of humaneness. We can recognise the national character in the form of the constitution. Further, when we become liberated from delusion, we can live as humans ought to live – this itself is moksha . We don’t need to turn ice into stone or stone into water. We don’t need to give rit...
[JV p18 ?] ...f what is provisioned in existence, it results in nothing but devastation. For instance, we used so many resources for war, but we could accomplish nothing other than the destruction of Earth and humans through this. Perhaps the scientific community is slowly recognising this. If they had recognised it sooner, humans could have become happy and prosperous. Perhaps it was bound to happen in this way – like the river that crosses many banks before it meets the ocean. First, humans had to go through mystical idealism ...
[JV p30 ?] ...t, but a human will understand only from another human. Most importantly, here logic has science aligned with wisdom and wisdom aligned with science . Wisdom means recognition of the purpose. We will analyse something if its purpose is understood and has been recognised. You also know what happens if we keep analysing without understanding the purpose. You can evaluate yourself whether science has taken humankind to great heights or into a vicious trap. Resolution centred Materialism posits that all physical and ch...
[JV p39 ?] ...mercial establishments claim to provide order based on fear and temptation. However, neither fear nor temptation can be the basis of orderliness, as they are unacceptable to humans. So, what should humans have? Values and evaluation. There must be a method to recognise values and a technique for evaluation. With these two things, the tradition of continuous resolution will persist. Values and evaluation are processes of understanding; they are not bodily or mechanical processes. Currently, science asserts that ever...
[JV p43 ?] ...42 to understand jeevan. Everyone has this need—the rich, the poor, the mighty, the weak, the old, and the young. We discover another formula here: Jeevan Vidya refutes the existential basis of class struggle. Instead, it recognises coexistence as the foundation for universal well-being, the source of continuous happiness for all, and evidence of resolution in life. These realisations naturally arise upon understanding. In my view, humans want this very knowledge, and they want...
[JV p55 ?] ...duct is explained as the combined form of values, character, and ethics. The right-use and protection of resources in the form of body, mind, and wealth constitute ethics. Values are realised through the recognition of relationships. For example, when someone recognises their relationship with their father, mother, or guru in terms of orderliness, values naturally flow, resulting in the fulfilment of those values. Where relationships are not recognised, there is no flow of values. Consider a scenario where someone ...

----- TERM: fulfil -----
[JV p14 ?] ...does jeevan want to evidence? The answer I found is that jeevan first wants to live and then, along with living, wants to become happy. Along with being happy, it also wants to evidence itself. These are the three stages. The first stage of wanting to live is fulfilled in the animal order itself. The next two stages of wanting happiness and evidencing can be accomplished only in humans and nowhere else. I have seen this very thoroughly. I found this immensely satisfying. After that, in the same vein, I discovered t...
[JV p28 ?] ...urthly, I became social in behaviour . I started getting satisfaction within myself from becoming social. As a benefit, I was left with no complaints with the world. Now every moment I keep scrutinizing the meaningfulness of my actions. I live meaningfully by fulfilling duties and responsibilities in all my relationships. Fifthly, I attained prosperity . Though I was born in a hardworking family and I knew how to do physical labour and seva , but I didn’t then really understand the meaning of prosperity. The meanin...
[JV p32 ?] ...31 principles of coexistence. It is ironic that even after doing all these, we desired and hoped to achieve what is right. Our hope remained unfulfilled, and we kept facing the consequences of our actions. We laughed and cried amidst this. When one family or community kills someone from the enemy side, they become very happy, thinking they have eliminated their enemy. Governments and nations think in...
[JV p42 ?] ...cold or heat are not felt in such areas. For instance, during surgery under anaesthesia, there is no perception of pain from incisions or sutures. Thus, sensory perception occurs only in those regions where jeevan maintains vitality. When jeevan seeks its own fulfilment, it embarks on a quest for truth, meaning, and reality. Therefore, jeevan is the basis of happiness. This is the reason we need ...
[JV p44 ?] ...nism and capitalism. Communism failed to break free from the pursuit of profit and ended up striving for national profit, while capitalism unabashedly prioritises profit. Therefore, humans must grasp their values to emancipate themselves from profit and loss. Fulfilling human values is imperative. How can this be achieved? Human values are realised through understanding Jeevan Vidya – i.e. comprehending existence in the form of coexistence and embracing humane conduct with confidence. This, in itself, constitutes u...
[JV p55 ?] ...body, mind, and wealth constitute ethics. Values are realised through the recognition of relationships. For example, when someone recognises their relationship with their father, mother, or guru in terms of orderliness, values naturally flow, resulting in the fulfilment of those values. Where relationships are not recognised, there is no flow of values. Consider a scenario where someone is sitting alone in a train compartment, and a stranger enters. The individual who was seated initially instinctively stretches ou...

----- TERM: usefulness -----
[JV p18 ?] ...and surrounded in Omnipresence. I have seen this precisely. There is no provision in existence to separate units of nature from Omnipresence. Humans cannot create that for which there is no provision in existence. If humans accomplish anything contrary to the usefulness of what is provisioned in existence, it results in nothing but devastation. For instance, we used so many resources for war, but we could accomplish nothing other than the destruction of Earth and humans through this. Perhaps the scientific communit...
[JV p43 ?] ...e clung to the value of those things where profit could be made, while neglecting the value of humanity. By comprehending human values, jeevan values, established values, and civic values, concerns about profit and loss vanish. We would then live based on the usefulness ...
[JV p64 ?] ...ion, prosperity, confidence, and understanding of coexistence. There is a difference in the way jeevan understands jeevan, and the way jeevan understands existence. As far as material things are concerned, we recognise them upon experimentation based on their usefulness. We recognise usefulness in the form of common and ...
[JV p109 ?] ...108 Traditionally, we identify relationships based on power, wealth, intelligence, or age. However, in reality, our relationships are meant first for evidencing comprehensive resolution, second for nurturing, third for protection, fourth for usefulness and complementariness, fifth for right-use, and sixth for purposeful-use. Authenticity is the highest priority in relationships. Everyone is satisfied on the basis of authenticity. Values naturally emerge from jeevan. For example, when you and I mee...
[JV p123 ?] ...122 Questions and Answers This part of the book has a selection of some questions asked by students of Jeevan Vidya and their answers given by Shree A Nagraj. Question: - Do material objects have no value? Answer : - Usefulness value of material objects is definite. The usefulness value of one kilogram of wheat today is the same as what it was one hundred years ago. We only brought its value down by interfering in it (for example by using chemical fertilisers). People beca...
[JV p137 ?] ...cumulation. However, upon awakening through humane way of living in orderliness our common and special aspirations become limited (definite), i.e. our needs become satisfied with fewer resources. The object value remains constant. For example, whatever value (usefulness) is there in one kilogram sesame seeds, it has always been the same. Similarly, the value of medicine, rice, wheat, vegetables, etc ...

----- TERM: complementarin -----
[JV p30 ?] ...29 I have tried to describe it here. The erstwhile ideologies are struggle-centred or conflict-centred materialism. While in the state and motion of coexistence, there is no fight, no revolt, and no snatching or robbing - instead, there is mutual complementariness, celebration, joyousness, and continuous progression. This is what I have tried to explain here. Literature is literally just words! According to me, literature is an attempt, but a human will understand only from another human. Most importan...
[JV p51 ?] ...ty that understands, and the evidence of understanding occurs only within human tradition because the fully developed brain is found only in the human body. The evidence of understanding will not be found in any other (animal) species. Coexistence encompasses complementariness, evolution, development progression, development and awakening. The method for understanding all these points is inherent only in humans. The potential for this understanding is also inherent only in humans. The fundamental issue in understan...
[JV p59 ?] ...rovision to evidence understanding, a feature not present in animal bodies. Therefore, humans are recognised as sanskar-conformance entities. Apart from humans, all three orders in nature are mutually complementary. Now, it is imperative for humans to embrace complementariness. For humans to live in harmony, complementariness is essential; this cannot be achieved through individualism or hedonism. The two ideologies of materialism and asceticism in the past led humans towards individualism. Materialism leads humans...
[JV p63 ?] ...ng prevail. It is with this grandeur that humans can achieve a tradition of continuous happiness. They can achieve harmony in their interaction with the animal world, plant world and mineral world, making their use and right-use while being grateful for their complementariness, thereby living purposefully. The harmony with humans is as a relationship, values, evaluation and mutual satisfaction. We choose satisfaction over dissatisfaction. Every human, in the anticipation of satisfaction, evidences coexistence throu...
[JV p64 ?] ...63 determined by the way of coexistence, it is not the doing of deluded humans. Existence has manifested all the four orders naturally, which has no human contribution. Humans could not evidence complementariness with the rest of nature, instead they have only been exploiting it. It begs the question: how can humanity hope to find happiness through exploitation? This is a matter worth pondering. Across nations, sects, religions, and even within famili...
[JV p70 ?] ...69 material order, biological order, and animal order also recognise one another and fulfil, which is evident in the form of complementariness in nature. Humans, however, could not be satisfied with mere recognising and fulfilling, and doubts arose within them. Humans have two additional activities – knowing and believing. Humans become satisfied with recognising and fulfilling only...

----- TERM: developmental progression -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: constitution -----
[JV p8 ?] ...are the background of how this arose. This bodily journey of mine began in a hard-working, selflessly serving, pious, and reverential family in the Vedic tradition. As you are all aware, every child that is born follows the faith of their parents, accepts the constitution of one nation or another, receives the education available in their tradition, and tries to follow the path set out by their teachers. I too started going through all these at the place and family where I was born. Furthermore, there were dictates...
[JV p11 ?] ...lved in the independence movement, but I also observed some detrimental changes that happened in them along with this success. This, too, caused me pain. After that, one more hope got kindled. It was the hope that we (the Indian Nation) would now have our own constitution, and perhaps that constitution would provision evaluation of an authentic human. I kept thinking and hoping that the constitution would show the way. I used to avidly follow newspaper reports regarding the formulation of the constitution. By the y...
[JV p16 ?] ...ll orderliness. I found the path for humans to achieve this as well. I discovered the definition of human being. Awakened human being’s work and behaviour is the embodiment of “humaneness”. When we articulate this work and behaviour, it is called sociology or constitution. I understood that imparting the understanding of humane conduct is the essence ...
[JV p17 ?] ...16 of sociology. In this way, I found answers to both my questions. The constitution shall provide the code of conduct of humaneness. We can recognise the national character in the form of the constitution. Further, when we become liberated from delusion, we can live as humans ought to live – this itself is moksha . We don’t need ...
[JV p19 ?] ...e to convey this knowledge? Do people have a need for it or not? Thus began what we now know as Jeevan Vidya. The point when I became confident (about the Jeevan Vidya program) was when I realised that “the code of humane conduct” can be incorporated into the Constitution. A humane national character will become evident as a result. I am definite about this. I am myself proficient and living evidence of this knowledge. I have understood ‘existence’ and I can impart that understanding to you. I have understood ‘jeev...
[JV p21 ?] ...hough the human race is on the verge of being wiped out from Earth. We need to pay attention to this. Humans will have to become wise whenever they decide to avert this problem. There is no other way. Crimes cannot be controlled through lack of understanding, constitutional means or otherwise; a crime is still a crime. All the nations on this Earth have their respective Constitutions. Each of these Constitutions has three main agendas and a common theme - ‘Power-Centric Rule’ . Power-Centric Rule gets implemented i...

----- TERM: atom -----
[JV p3 ?] ...s submerged, soaked, and surrounded by Omnipotence (Paramatma). From the year 1976 onwards, he started sharing his realisations with those who came to him. During this period, notable scientists such as Dr. C.V. Raman and Dr. Homi Bhabha, the president of the Atomic Energy Commission, sought his audience. Simultaneously, ordinary villagers, often deemed illiterate, also sought his guidance. He began expounding the Truth, sharing profound insights with those who listened. As people grasped the truths he articulated,...
[JV p13 ?] ...ly carried it out. As a result of practising samyama , I started seeing every bit of existence in front of me. Here, seeing means understanding. I have sequentially and systematically observed all the processes that have taken place in emergence from a single atom to the vast earth. I ...
[JV p14 ?] ...13 have achieved a state where I can impart this understanding to you. Along with this, I also saw the ‘jeevan atom’ in the sequence of atoms. The ‘jeevan atom’ is the same in me, in you, in a newborn person, and even when it is without a body. I realised that jeevan exists both with and without a body. Why does it exist with a body? I will explain that later when the ...
[JV p37 ?] ... want to first clarify that jeevan is eternally the same. Everyone wants to know and believe the reality of jeevan, and to evidence this understanding. This is the basic objective. Jeevan is neither physical nor non-physical. It is a constitutionally complete atom and a sentient entity. What is constitutional completeness? This atom’s constitution doesn’t undergo the expulsion or insertion of particles. However, insertion and expulsion are found in the atoms in physicochemical forms, which are called 'results' - wh...
[JV p40 ?] ...ot eternal; it undergoes change repeatedly, whereas jeevan has eternal continuity. Therefore, we need to have the wisdom to make decisions based on jeevan. Jeevan is in the same form in all humans. Its powers and strengths are inexhaustible because the jeevan atom remains unchanged in its constitution. The strength and power of an entity manifest in its state and motion, respectively. Every human acknowledges the continuity of their being, which is due to presence of jeevan within them. Being itself is presence; th...
[JV p63 ?] ...his itself has eternal continuity in the form of coexistence. Coexistence is continuously in effect, as a result there is emergence of development and awakening. The development progression is as continuous activity of physicochemical reality. How many jeevan atoms are to be is ...

----- TERM: molecule -----
[JV p67 ?] ...es on even in the insentient atoms. This is the cause of transformation in the insentient nature. Everywhere, there exists a natural inclination towards coexistence. This inclination is what leads atomic particles to assemble into atoms, atoms to combine into molecules, and molecules to combine into molecular forms. In this way, humans can understand the being of infinite planets and celestial bodies in existence. The basic form of diversity in the insentient nature lies in the differentiation of particles comprisi...
[JV p69 ?] ...y entity of nature recognises another; that is why it fulfils. An atomic particle too recognises another, and as a result, these particles abide in orderliness. They cohabit and function with one another, thus manifesting coexistence. Similarly, starting from molecules to planets, the entities of nature recognise one another and fulfil accordingly. All units of ...
[JV p81 ?] ...f beliefs and faith. Faith means believing without knowing. Trust means believing after knowing. The ten activities of jeevan become evident when living with trust. I evidence all ten activities, and so can you. Humans must evidence coexistence. The atoms and molecules too exist in orderliness while recognising one another. All the planets, celestial bodies, vegetation, and minerals are in orderliness, evidencing coexistence. At the fundamental level, all units are energised within themselves to evidence coexistenc...
[JV p82 ?] ...r grandeur through coexistence alone. They thrive through the way of coexistence. Without coexistence, nothing would be protected. At the fundamental level, every entity is protected, regulated, and energised by Omnipotence. While those working in the form of molecules and biological cells have specific functions, the grandeur of coexistence is evident even in this. The coexistence of one cell ( pran kosha ) with another cell leads to multicellular forms, resulting in the formation of definite organisms. The method...
[JV p150 ?] ...149 absolute state, indicating that there is no weight in the coexistence of Omnipotence and units. Weight becomes evident only in the interaction of units. For example, weight is evident in the mutuality of two atoms due to their tendency to form molecules. Similarly, weight is evident among molecules due to their tendency to form definite compositions. This manifestation of weight in the mutuality of units is commonly called the gravitational force. In reality, it indicates participation in the develo...
[JV p157 ?] ... while the other progresses. According to this belief, only the strong are fit to exist, while the weak are not. I have seen that there is no conflict in existence. Each unit has inherent strength. Even a subatomic particle has inherent strength, as do atoms, molecules, and bodies composed of molecules—all possess inherent strength. They are capable of achieving complementarity through mutual offering and acceptance, leading to progress. If they had understood existence, they couldn’t have written dialectical mater...

----- TERM: cell -----
[JV p14 ?] ...ss with resolution”. The insentient world, which we call material order and biological order, exists in solid, liquid, and gaseous states. I realised that there is a combination of a great many rasa and rasayan at the root of numerous formations of biological cells. Whatever else humans are to do, they will keep doing. I saw that the composition of the body is only from the combination of these substances. Both animal and human bodies are composed only of physicochemical substances. The essential difference I saw b...
[JV p18 ?] ...o kinds of entities (units) – insentient and sentient. Sentient entities mean animal-kind and humankind, and insentient entities mean material order and biological order. Insentient entities include all the minerals, soils, metals and formations of biological cells. All of these are soaked, submerged and surrounded in Omnipresence. I have seen this precisely. There is no provision in existence to separate units of nature from Omnipresence. Humans cannot create that for which there is no provision in existence. If h...
[JV p27 ?] ...I achieved a state which I will now describe to you. I attained confidence within myself after understanding. I didn’t have to exert any effort for it. I started verifying this confidence in all aspects of my living as well. In the same way, the respect for excellence also became feasible. I could evaluate excellence, which naturally results in having respect for it. We cannot respect what we do not evaluate. Thirdly, I comfortably integrated this understanding ...
[JV p69 ?] ...r imaginativeness and free will, but this search and exploration is meaningful only when it is for orderliness, and for achieving resolution, prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence. Understanding leads humans to achieve: 1. Self-confidence 2. Respect for Excellence 3. Balance in Talent and Personality 4. Sociability in Behaviour 5. Self-reliance in Vocation These can be called merits. Humans become social with these merits. Evidencing understanding in living itself is ‘learning’. Only humans could become ‘learne...
[JV p77 ?] ...s forever. We have seen all these things. Based on this, the proposal is that understanding is the right of every human. Every individual can research this. In my opinion, humanity can prosper and create its future moments with complete resolution. Biological cells decompose into the soil and turn into fertiliser. The natural arrangement of food for food is an intrinsic process in nature. Fertilisers are formed naturally this way. Biological cells are created, ...
[JV p78 ?] ...77 and the structures made from these cells decompose back into the soil, becoming fertiliser. Human emergence on Earth occurred only after this soil fertility was established. Since humans appeared, they began exploiting forests. With the advent of the scientific age, the exploitation extended to...

----- TERM: order -----
[JV p3 ?] ...tence, he understood humans as a combined form of jeevan and body. The realisation of the sentient and insentient nature being saturated in the omnipresent power (Omnipotence), which we call by names such as God, Truth, Brahma, etc., also happened. The entire orderliness in existence was understood. He saw that all of nature is submerged, soaked, and surrounded by Omnipotence (Paramatma). From the year 1976 onwards, he started sharing his realisations with those who came to him. During this period, notable scientis...
[JV p14 ?] ...ence? The answer I found is that jeevan first wants to live and then, along with living, wants to become happy. Along with being happy, it also wants to evidence itself. These are the three stages. The first stage of wanting to live is fulfilled in the animal order itself. The next two stages of wanting happiness and evidencing can be accomplished only in humans and nowhere else. I have seen this very thoroughly. I found this immensely satisfying. After that, in the same vein, I discovered the formula for living wi...
[JV p15 ?] ...ain becomes fully enriched only in the human body. Being enriched means the human brain has the capability for jeevan to evidence itself in a multi-faceted way. I have seen this precisely. After seeing all of this, it occurred to me that animal-kind is in its orderliness, which is explained and clearly defined. Similarly, I realised that humans too are clearly defined and explained in the form of “inherent orderliness”, and they could live happily by living in this manner. Along with this, I also found the answers ...
[JV p16 ?] ... gentle! What is the correlation here? What is the correlation between what we teach our children and what we bless them to become? I found the answer to my second question about national character as well. What did I find? Each unit in existence has inherent orderliness and participates in the overall orderliness. I found the path for humans to achieve this as well. I discovered the definition of human being. Awakened human being’s work and behaviour is the embodiment of “humaneness”. When we articulate this work ...
[JV p18 ?] ...t of nature is soaked, surrounded and submerged in this second reality. This can be called Omnipresence. There are two kinds of entities (units) – insentient and sentient. Sentient entities mean animal-kind and humankind, and insentient entities mean material order and biological order. Insentient entities include all the minerals, soils, metals and formations of biological cells. All of these are soaked, submerged and surrounded in Omnipresence. I have seen this precisely. There is no provision in existence to sep...
[JV p20 ?] ...have understood this, and if they haven't, they are bound to, as is everyone else. This is how one arrives at the understanding of truth. At the fundamental level, a ‘reality’ never gets annihilated. Therefore, if Earth remains healthy, and humans can live in orderliness, this would be the basis of universal and eternal wellbeing. This wish of mine for universal goodness rests primarily on the principle of humane conduct. Humane conduct is the main pillar on which this wish of mine for universal goodness rests. The...

----- TERM: lineage -----
[JV p59 ?] ...eternal wellbeing. The inherent need to deploy our body, mind, and wealth towards righteousness is meant for our awakening. Human beings are the only entities in existence capable of wisdom. Humans are a combination of jeevan and body. Human bodies follow the lineage tradition, while jeevan exists naturally in existence as a constitutionally complete entity, with no human contribution to its creation. The human body, however, is a product of human tradition. This is how it is provisioned in existence. The union of ...

----- TERM: seed -----
[JV p48 ?] ... them. This program aims to address that aspiration. Only humans among the four orders of nature cannot attain happiness without understanding and resolution. The material order is regulated by structural conformity, while the biological order is regulated by seed conformity. The animal order is regulated by species conformity. The evidence of regulation manifests as orderliness and definite conduct. Every unit of nature, except humans, exhibits definite conduct. Humans also require definite conduct, which they ach...
[JV p51 ?] ... This paves the way for realisation-based living. In conclusion, upon attaining understanding, humans live in orderliness through a realisation-based approach. The orderliness of the animal order is through species-conformance, the biological order is through seed-conformance, and the material order is through constitution-conformance. We can conclude that understanding is definite and it pertains to living with developed consciousness. The bearer and carrier of understanding is definite; therefore, the evidence of...
[JV p107 ?] ...an that everyone who met me accepted my ideas. Many people did not, and I respect their stance as well. It is not their fault; they are burdened by tradition. Consequently, I remain content whether someone accepts my ideas or not. Each human being carries the seed of righteousness within them, and the sanyog must occur for this seed to flourish. When and how this will happen, we cannot predict. Every human desires good to prevail. I aim to bring the possibilities of its realisation within reach. Sanyog occurs when ...
[JV p113 ?] ...ed, and mutual satisfaction results. Orderliness is a perpetual truth in coexistence. Each unit in existence has inherent orderliness. For example - oak-ness is the inherentness in an oak tree. A peepal tree maintains its definite conduct with all its fruits, seeds and leaves exhibiting peepal’s properties, intrinsic nature and dharma. In the same way, the conduct of entire units of plant world and animal world is definite, each exhibiting their respective definite conducts. This is inherent orderliness. The conduc...
[JV p117 ?] ...We can generate 50 times more electricity than our requirement this way. We need to develop efficient turbines for this. Second, there are some machines which only run with oil; for these, we will need to make engines that run with vegetable oil. There are oilseed vegetations which could be grown in large quantities, I think. Third, solar energy is already in focus; it needs more urgent attention. We need to make more and more machines and industries work with solar energy. In this way, we understand that there is ...
[JV p137 ?] ...humane way of living in orderliness our common and special aspirations become limited (definite), i.e. our needs become satisfied with fewer resources. The object value remains constant. For example, whatever value (usefulness) is there in one kilogram sesame seeds, it has always been the same. Similarly, the value of medicine, rice, wheat, vegetables, etc ...

----- TERM: sanskar -----
[JV p48 ?] ...ty. The animal order is regulated by species conformity. The evidence of regulation manifests as orderliness and definite conduct. Every unit of nature, except humans, exhibits definite conduct. Humans also require definite conduct, which they achieve through sanskar-conformity. Sanskar, manifested as developed consciousness, is the basis of understanding. Humane conduct is the evidence of this understanding. When ...
[JV p50 ?] ...49 Humans are sanskar-conforming units. Sanskar is the combined form of understanding, honesty, responsibility, and participation. Since wrongs are not acceptable to anyone, they do not become sanskar. No one accepts wrongs but remains ensnared by them. Even if a person has...
[JV p54 ?] ...53 awakening. Humans are sanskar -conformance units. Tradition is the source of understanding or delusion. The traits of tradition are instilled in a human child from birth. Thereafter through their diligence and quest, they become liberated from delusion upon attaining wisdom. Libera...
[JV p59 ?] ... This is how it is provisioned in existence. The union of jeevan and body is necessary for jeevan to manifest its awakening. Human bodies have the provision to evidence understanding, a feature not present in animal bodies. Therefore, humans are recognised as sanskar-conformance entities. Apart from humans, all three orders in nature are mutually complementary. Now, it is imperative for humans to embrace complementariness. For humans to live in harmony, complementariness is essential; this cannot be achieved throug...
[JV p60 ?] ... They become helpless due to living in animal consciousness. Therefore, what is the solution? We should focus on educating those who are ready to understand immediately. Through them, we should practice humane education in educational institutions and instill sanskar in children. As sanskar is instilled in children, their homes and families will naturally undergo a transformation. Thus, there is a need for the humanisation of education. Making education meaningful will pave the way for an orderly society, which is ...
[JV p80 ?] ...s. Every individual can think and search. We must find satisfaction in our own search and also strive to be a source of satisfaction for others. What should be done to start from here? First, understanding should become accessible to all through education and sanskar. We need to adopt the art of living with understanding - which encompasses how we coexist with Earth, water, air, plants, animals, and humans. We cannot exclude any; we must live in harmony with all of these. Every human being inherently claims that th...

----- TERM: tradition -----
[JV p2 ?] ...e forests, harsh weather, wild animals, scarcity of food, and various discomforts—he persisted in his quest. Initiated by Shree Chandrashekhar Bharti, the Shankaracharya of the famous Sringeri Math, Shree Nagraj ji carried on with his austerities according to traditional methods. Through unwavering dedication, he eventually attained a state of samadhi . Yet, finding no answers to his inquiries in ...
[JV p8 ?] ... May the Earth be heaven, May humans be deities, May dharma prevail, May goodness be eternal. I want to share the background of how this arose. This bodily journey of mine began in a hard-working, selflessly serving, pious, and reverential family in the Vedic tradition. As you are all aware, every child that is born follows the faith of their parents, accepts the constitution of one nation or another, receives the education available in their tradition, and tries to follow the path set out by their teachers. I too ...
[JV p9 ?] ... or not, they were not happy all the time. Even though it was not possible to find more reverential or bigger scholars of scriptures than them anywhere. As a result of this situation, I concluded that I would never blindly follow the dictates and sanctions of tradition. It started becoming like a sacred oath for me. Another factor that got added to this was that my elders could not make me understand. All in all, the more they failed, the more my conceit grew. The growth in my conceit and my not adhering to the ste...
[JV p14 ?] ...u, in a newborn person, and even when it is without a body. I realised that jeevan exists both with and without a body. Why does it exist with a body? I will explain that later when the context arises. I saw that ‘jeevan’ wants to evidence itself in the human tradition through the body. That is the only formula here. What does jeevan want to evidence? The answer I found is that jeevan first wants to live and then, along with living, wants to become happy. Along with being happy, it also wants to evidence itself. Th...
[JV p16 ?] ...s ignorance or delusion. What is ignorance? To live like animals. How can we consider animal behaviour to be evidence for humans? If we assume animal living to be the evidence and model human living according to that, then that would be a delusion for humans. Traditions compel us to live with ignorance. Its testimony is sex-obsessed psychology, consumption-obsessed sociology, and profit-obsessed economics in the present education. It is ironic that in the midst of this, people bless their children to become good, m...
[JV p19 ?] ... work so that this state arises in everyone! What would it be like if this happens? Then the proclamation that I had shared with you will come true. Earth will become heavenly, humans will become deities, dharma will prevail, and goodness will be eternal. The tradition of eternal goodness will be established. Thus, I began examining myself by asking: Will I be able to convey this knowledge? Do people have a need for it or not? Thus began what we now know as Jeevan Vidya. The point when I became confident (about the...

----- TERM: generation -----
[JV p49 ?] ...nvey it to others, only then does your understanding become evident. This is how understanding flows in tradition. Ignorance cannot flow in tradition. The object of understanding doesn’t vary. Any variation occurs in its expression; thus, with each successive generation, it becomes more robust and refined. The path of righteousness keeps becoming ever sharper and more accessible. This is necessary for all humans. Hence, only a human possessing understanding can correctly impart their wisdom to the succeeding genera...
[JV p50 ?] ... anyone, they do not become sanskar. No one accepts wrongs but remains ensnared by them. Even if a person has committed a thousand wrongs, those wrongs remain unacceptable to them. Because wrongs are not acceptable to anyone, no one passes them on to the next generation. Thus, the tradition of senselessness (wrongs) does not form. These examples lead to the conclusion that understanding is the foundation of tradition. The focal point for understanding is the identicality of humane consciousness among humans. The fo...
[JV p159 ?] ...ns have become buried under problems. Anywhere you see there are only problems and humans are nowhere to be seen. The result is endless social, political, cultural and economic problems that have eclipsed humans. Every human life ends struggling with problems generation after generation. Its alternative, Behaviour Centred Public Discourse postulates that humans become resolved through behaviour. Behaviour happens in our relationship with humans and in our relationship with the natural surroundings. All our behaviou...

----- TERM: family -----
[JV p6 ?] ...shing all Madhyasth Darshan literature of Baba ji. I want to express my gratitude to Shree Sadhan Bhattacharya (Manav Teerth, Kiritpur), who has provided clarification from time to time for furthering my understanding. My sincere gratitude to all Jeevan Vidya family who provided useful suggestions, encouragement and support for this work. My sincere gratitude to Baba ji’s family at Amarkantak who have been serving tirelessly for furthering this Darshan. Lastly, I want to express gratitude to my family, which has al...
[JV p8 ?] ...oodness be eternal." May the Earth be heaven, May humans be deities, May dharma prevail, May goodness be eternal. I want to share the background of how this arose. This bodily journey of mine began in a hard-working, selflessly serving, pious, and reverential family in the Vedic tradition. As you are all aware, every child that is born follows the faith of their parents, accepts the constitution of one nation or another, receives the education available in their tradition, and tries to follow the path set out by th...
[JV p13 ?] ... would be answered. However, even after years of waiting, I did not get answers to my questions. This was the second failure. I did not get answers from understanding Vedanta, and I did not get answers after achieving samadhi . Even the highest scholars in my family could not provide any answers. Where could I go now? There was no point in blaming anyone, and so I continued living through this deadlock. I had heard all about samadhi , and one day I had become confident that I had attained it as well, but how would ...
[JV p23 ?] ...nd relief with the advent of the age of kingdoms. The promise was that the king would ensure the security of life and property, but that hasn’t happened until now. Life and property remain insecure; peace and harmony are further still. It is natural for every family and sect to be concerned about the security of their life & property and for peace & harmony. Similarly, idealism emerged, but whatever relief people found in it proved insufficient over time. When this became inadequate, it was natural to reconsider, l...
[JV p28 ?] ...ith no complaints with the world. Now every moment I keep scrutinizing the meaningfulness of my actions. I live meaningfully by fulfilling duties and responsibilities in all my relationships. Fifthly, I attained prosperity . Though I was born in a hardworking family and I knew how to do physical labour and seva , but I didn’t then really understand the meaning of prosperity. The meaning of prosperity was understood now. We produce more than the needs of our family to experience prosperity. In this manner, I acquire...
[JV p32 ?] ...31 principles of coexistence. It is ironic that even after doing all these, we desired and hoped to achieve what is right. Our hope remained unfulfilled, and we kept facing the consequences of our actions. We laughed and cried amidst this. When one family or community kills someone from the enemy side, they become very happy, thinking they have eliminated their enemy. Governments and nations think in the same way. The seats of religion are also based on this thinking. Now, what should be done? Where can ...

----- TERM: village -----
[JV p2 ?] ...dividual like one of us; he embarked on a journey to the solitude of Amarkantak in search of understanding human nature. Amarkantak, renowned as a pilgrimage site in India, marks the origin of the river Narmada. Shree Nagraj, who we now call Baba ji, left his village Agrahar in Mysore province and came here in search of answers to some questions. Undeterred by the challenges he faced—dense forests, harsh weather, wild animals, scarcity of food, and various discomforts—he persisted in his quest. Initiated by Shree C...
[JV p3 ?] ... year 1976 onwards, he started sharing his realisations with those who came to him. During this period, notable scientists such as Dr. C.V. Raman and Dr. Homi Bhabha, the president of the Atomic Energy Commission, sought his audience. Simultaneously, ordinary villagers, often deemed illiterate, also sought his guidance. He began expounding the Truth, sharing profound insights with those who listened. As people grasped the truths he articulated, some started disseminating this wisdom through workshops titled "Jeevan...
[JV p27 ?] ...human being. Every human has that ability and longing for kindling enthusiasm for this understanding in them. That’s the essence and purpose of this proposal. Science is a step in itself; its preceding step was idealism, which in turn followed the step of the village and tribal world. Further back, humans wandered in the jungles during the Stone Age. We have progressed step by step to reach where we are today. We should acknowledge the contribution of each step and be grateful for them. Here, I have provided a gene...
[JV p58 ?] ...ow do we impart understanding to each one of them? Where will we find enough doctors to fix them? No one accepts anything until they have understood it themselves. I am a testament to this truth. I was surrounded by ved-murtis in my family, neighbourhood, and village, yet they could not make me read the Vedas because I did not want to read. However, every individual on Earth desires to become wise. On this basis, there is a complete possibility that every human can become wise. It is on this premise that I initiate...
[JV p102 ?] ...ral surroundings is timeless and our relationship with other humans is continuous. When someone makes a mistake then where do they go for guidance? First someone from their family, who lives with justice, gives guidance. If not from family then someone in the village gives guidance. If there is nobody to guide in the village also, then they will try looking for someone in their country or the whole Earth. It is a natural human tendency. Every human has a natural tendency for reforming themselves somewhere or the ot...
[JV p112 ?] ...ly as bodies, and they recognised the necessity of living in orderliness. As a result, many children started losing interest in television and frivolous talks, evaluating them as meaningless. Additionally, conflicts, fights, and ill-will among families in the village began to diminish. To my knowledge, these villages now experience fewer disputes and conflicts. I assert that the environment shaped by the children's conduct had a significant impact, and on this basis, I claim that this education system is effective....

----- TERM: world family -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: undivided society -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: universal order -----
[JV p38 ?] ...e and sensitivity within the human tradition. Without jeevan, even if humans were to succeed in artificially constructing the body, they would be unable to evidence sensitivity, let alone conscience. Therefore, humans can live in harmony and contribute to the universal orderliness of existence only in the course of evidencing their sensitivity and conscience. That is all the work there is! All living beings of animal order evidence sensitivity. Humans, however, don’t become satisfied or happy without evidencing con...
[JV p45 ?] ...bined form of jeevan and body is necessary for manifesting (evidencing) the understanding. It would neither occur solely by the body nor solely by jeevan. Evidence of understanding is exemplified through humans living in orderliness and their participation in universal orderliness, which is the embodiment of understanding itself. All of us want to live in orderliness, and this naturally stems from jeevan; it is not an external imposition upon us. In the course of understanding coexistence, it becomes clear that exi...
[JV p50 ?] ...The understanding that has been accepted in me is verified through my behaviour, work, and participation in systems. I have repeatedly verified it in my behaviour and work, and found that my living is orderly in the form of resolution and prosperity. However, universal orderliness is yet to be established in human tradition. My living in the form of an indivisible society itself serves as evidence in human tradition of my having understood reality as it is in existence, which further enhances realisation. This real...
[JV p53 ?] ...es prosperity, fearlessness, and coexistence naturally. Without living justly, resolution cannot be achieved. Therefore, justice is the backbone of humaneness. Justice is first evidenced in a wise family, then in society, and finally across the whole Earth as universal orderliness. Living justly ensures that humans remain satisfied, happy, and resolved. Their trust in the present becomes firmer, and their behaviour continuously refines. All of these are accomplished spontaneously by living with justice. It is said ...
[JV p62 ?] ...ning humaneness, or orderly living. Self-governance is the self-inspired orderly living, which is the manifestation of humane conduct. The grandeur of human awakening is in realising their relationships at the level of individual, family, society, nature, and universal orderliness. We come to trust in the present only through the process of realising values in our relationships. Without recognising our relationships, ...
[JV p66 ?] ...tion, leading to the realisation of prosperity. As prosperity dawns, we begin to live in a state of orderliness. Hence, it is imperative to cultivate self-reliance in our students, and thereafter develop their tendency for evidence in the family and living in universal orderliness. It is good fortune of humans to evidence at these three levels. Its inherent need in humans is the one and only basis to actualise this good fortune. When this need gets identified then it would be natural for humans to evidence themselv...

----- TERM: evaluation -----
[JV p11 ?] ...detrimental changes that happened in them along with this success. This, too, caused me pain. After that, one more hope got kindled. It was the hope that we (the Indian Nation) would now have our own constitution, and perhaps that constitution would provision evaluation of an authentic human. I kept thinking and hoping that the constitution would show the way. I used to avidly follow newspaper reports regarding the formulation of the constitution. By the year 1950, after having considered all the discussions, I con...
[JV p39 ?] ...ations, religions, industrial, and commercial establishments claim to provide order based on fear and temptation. However, neither fear nor temptation can be the basis of orderliness, as they are unacceptable to humans. So, what should humans have? Values and evaluation. There must be a method to recognise values and a technique for evaluation. With these two things, the tradition of continuous resolution will persist. Values and evaluation are processes of understanding; they are not bodily or mechanical processes...
[JV p41 ?] ...erpetually pursuing 'more.' One person thinks they have 'less,' another 'more,' leading to constant conflict. Such an approach does not foster a healthy and happy human existence. Therefore, for humans to live healthily and happily, they must adopt values and evaluation guided by awakened consciousness. The first step is understanding, the second step is honesty, the third step is responsibility, and the fourth step is participation. Humans need to evidence their understanding through these four steps. This underst...
[JV p55 ?] ... live with rightfully owned wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour. Right-use and protection of body, mind and wealth are ensured by such living. When these elements are harmonised, justice - manifested through relationships, values, evaluation, and mutual satisfaction - becomes self-evident. In this way, humane conduct is explained as the combined form of values, character, and ethics. The right-use and protection of resources in the form of body, mind, and wealth constitute ethics. Value...
[JV p63 ?] ... can achieve harmony in their interaction with the animal world, plant world and mineral world, making their use and right-use while being grateful for their complementariness, thereby living purposefully. The harmony with humans is as a relationship, values, evaluation and mutual satisfaction. We choose satisfaction over dissatisfaction. Every human, in the anticipation of satisfaction, evidences coexistence through resolution, prosperity, trust in the present, and living in orderliness. Existence is the ultimate ...
[JV p72 ?] ...of jeevan is to evidence human awakening in existence. Its success is based on the fact that every human wants to live in orderliness. While in delusion, the basis of order is fear and temptation. Upon awakening, orderliness is with the recognition of values, evaluation, and mutual satisfaction. There is a need to develop understanding for it. May there be universal well-being! ...

----- TERM: mutual fulfilment -----
(no hits)

==================== SOURCE MVD ====================


----- TERM: coexistence -----
[MVD p3 ?] ...ेय दश न ज्ञान है इसी के साथ जीवन ज्ञान व मानवीयतापूण  आचरण ज्ञान स हत सहअिस्तत्व प्रमा णत होने की  व ध अध्ययनगम्य हो चुकी है। Madhyasth Darshan posits that only humans are capable of knowing, and the entire object of this knowledge is existence in the form of coexistence, which itself is the knowledge with a holistic view. Furthermore, the way of evidencing coexistence has become studiable through knowledge of jeevan and humane conduct. अिस्तत्व मूलक मानव केिन्द्रत  चन्तन ज्ञान , मध्यस्थ दश न , सह - अिस्तत्ववाद - श...
[MVD p4 ?] ...hi . Based on its confirmation in the scriptures, I resolved to pursue sadhana , samadhi and samyama . Through sadhana and attaining samadhi , I reached complete understanding by studying and realising that all existence is in the form of being and abiding as coexistence. Consequently, the alternative worldview of Madhyasth Darshan Co-existentialism emerged in the form of literature. 5. आदश वादी शास्त्रों के अनुसार - रहस्य मूलक ईश्वर के द्रत  चंतन ज्ञान तथा परम्परा के अनुसार - ज्ञान अव्यक्त अ नव चनीय  वकल्प के अनुस...
[MVD p5 ?] ...ability and uncertainty-based materialism of matter-centric thinking, science is the only source of knowledge, and it is believed that the laws are made by humans. The alternative human-centric contemplation, based on the knowledge of existence in the form of coexistence, postulates that existence is stable, the development and awakening are definite, and all the laws are natural and inherent to being and abiding. 7. अिस्तत्व केवल भौ तक रासाय नक न होकर भौ तक रासाय नक एवं जीवन वस्तुयें व्यापक वस्तु में अ वभाज्य वत म...
[MVD p7 ?] ...samyama , I accepted the evidence of having attained samadhi . Even during the phase from samadhi to the accomplishment of samyama , I practised sadhana for 12 to 18 hours every day. As a result, I attained the realisation that all existence is in the form of coexistence, which I have presented in literary form as "Madhyasth Darshan Co-existentialism." 12. सहअिस्तत्व :- व्यापक वस्तु में संपूण  जड चैतन्य संपृक्त एवं  नत्य वत मान होना समझ में आया। page- 7 ...
[MVD p8 ?] ... सहअिस्तत्व में ही :- गठनपूण  परमाणु चैतन्य इकाई - जीवन रुप में होना समझ में आया। सहअिस्तत्व में ही :- भूखे व अजीण  परमाणु अणु व प्राणकोषाओं से ही सम्पूण  भौ तक - रासाय नक रचनायें तथा परमाणु अणुओं से र चत धरती तथा अनेक धर तयों का रचना स्पष्ट होना समझ में आया। Coexistence : - Entire insentient and sentient nature was understood to be saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and over...
[MVD p9 ?] ...यवस्था में भागीदारी  नत्य वैभव होना समझ में आया। इसे मैंने सव शुभ सूत्र माना और सव मानव में शुभापेक्षा होना स्वीकारा फलस्वरूप चेतना  वकास मूल्य  शक्षा , सं वधान , आचरण व्यवस्था सहज सूत्र व्याख्या , मानव सम्मुख प्रस्तुत  कया हूँ। The way of destiny : - through coexistence itself: - (i) Four orders in existence ● Material Order ● Biological order ● Animal Order ● Knowledge Order (ii) Four planes in existence ● Biological plane ● Delusion plane ● Deific plane ● Divine plane (iii) and ● Development progression, Develop...

----- TERM: saturated -----
[MVD p8 ?] ...ं आया। सहअिस्तत्व में ही :- भूखे व अजीण  परमाणु अणु व प्राणकोषाओं से ही सम्पूण  भौ तक - रासाय नक रचनायें तथा परमाणु अणुओं से र चत धरती तथा अनेक धर तयों का रचना स्पष्ट होना समझ में आया। Coexistence : - Entire insentient and sentient nature was understood to be saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and overfull atoms, and the development ( vikas ) of the atom itself as satiated, c...
[MVD p11 ?] ...ें सम्पृक्त जड़ - चैतन्य इकाईयाँ अनन्त । ● व्यापक ( पारगामी व पारदश  ) सत्ता में सम्पृक्त सभी इकाईयाँ रूप , गुण , स्वभाव व धम  सम्पन्न , त्व स हत व्यवस्था , समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी के रूप में हैं । The Realisation Knowledge ● Sentient and insentient nature saturated in Omnipotence. The countless sentient and insentient units are saturated in Omnipotence (Omnipresence). ● All units saturated in the Omnipresence (permeative and transparent) have form, properties, essential nature & dharma, and have inherent orderl...
[MVD p12 ?] ... ● जाने हुए को मान लो । माने हुए को जान लो । The Sermon ● Believe what is known Know what is believed 6. िस्थ त ● िस्थ तपूण  सत्ता में सम्पृक्त िस्थ तशील प्रकृ त । ● सहअिस्तत्व  नत्य वत मान । The State of Existence ● The state-dynamic nature saturated in the state-complete Omnipotence ● Eternally present Coexistence 7. प्रमाण ● अनुभव व्यवहार प्रयोग ● अनुभव ही प्रमाण परम प्रमाण ही समझ ज्ञान समझ ही प्रत्यक्ष , प्रत्यक्ष ही समाधान , काय  - व्यवहार , काय  - व्यवहार ही प्रमाण , प्रमाण ही जागृत परम्परा ...
[MVD p14 ?] ... ● Activity completeness ● Conduct completeness 12. आधार ● सत्ता में सम्पृक्त प्रकृ त ( सहअिस्तत्व ) । The Basis ● Nature saturated in Omnipotence (Coexistence) 13. प्र तपादन ● भौ तक रासाय नक प्रकृ त ही  वकास क्रम में है । परमाणु ही  वक सत रूप में चैतन्य इकाई है। ● चैतन्य इकाई अथा त् जीवन ही जागृ त पूव क मानव परम्परा में अखण्ड सामािजकता सहज प्रमाण । ● सतक तापूण  मानवीयता , देव मा...
[MVD p26 ?] ...ith Omnipotence, making it fully energised and active. Therefore, it has continuous activity of effort, motion, and result. Consequently, nature itself is perceptible as four orders. Thus, the sentient knowledge order, among the insentient and sentient nature saturated in omnipotence, has the close opportunity to attain the capacity, ability, and receptivity for realisation, and all the four orders are bonded for completeness and wholeness. सत्ता मध्यस्थ है । इस लये मध्यस्थ सत्ता में सम्पृक्त प्रकृ त  नयं त्रत एवं ...
[MVD p27 ?] ...eveloped than deific-human. ज्ञानावस्था की इकाई दश न क्षमता सम्पन्न है । दश न , व्यापक में अविस्थत जड़ - चैतन्यात्मक प्रकृ त के संदभ  में है। Units of knowledge order have the capacity of understanding. The understanding is about insentient and sentient nature saturated in Omnipotence. Realisation knowledge and understanding becomes complete only in the delusion-less state. इस लये -  नभ्र मता ही जागृ त , जागृ त ही प्रबुद्धता , प्रबुद्धता ही संप्रभुता , संप्रभुता ही प्रभुसत्ता , प्रभुसत्ता ही अखण्ड समाज , साव भौम व्य...

----- TERM: submerged -----
[MVD p32 Chapter-1] ... सत्ता में डूबा , भीगा ,  घरा हुआ जड़ - चैतन्य प्रकृ त है । यही सहअिस्तत्व है , सहअिस्तत्व ही  नत्य है , यही ज्ञान है । सहअिस्तत्व में ही  नयम ,  नयंत्रण , संतुलन , न्याय , धम  , परम सत्य स्पष्ट हैं । Saturated ( samprikt ): - Insentient and sentient nature is submerged, soaked and surrounded in Omnipotence. This itself is coexistence, coexistence itself page- 32 ...

----- TERM: energised -----
[MVD p26 ?] ...e activities, and it is bounded. Hence, Omnipotence is the state-complete. The insentient and sentient nature in Omnipotence is state-dynamic, therefore nature is contained within Omnipotence. Nature is encompassed and filled with Omnipotence, making it fully energised and active. Therefore, it has continuous activity of effort, motion, and result. Consequently, nature itself is perceptible as four orders. Thus, the sentient knowledge order, among the insentient and sentient nature saturated in omnipotence, has the...

----- TERM: definite conduct -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: regulated and conserved -----
[MVD p26 ?] ...क्त प्रकृ त  नयं त्रत एवं संर क्षत है । प्रत्येक परमाणु में पाये जाने वाला मध्यांश ( ना भक ) मध्यस्थ  क्रया है । इस लये सम -  वषमात्मक  क्रयाएं एवं सापेक्ष शिक्तयाँ  नयं त्रत एवं संर क्षत हैं । Omnipotence is mediative, therefore the nature saturated in it is regulated and conserved. The nucleus within every atom is the mediative activity, whereby the atom’s generative-degenerative activities and relative powers are regulated and conserved. अनन्त  क्रया अथवा  क्रया - समूह ही प्रकृ त है , जो जड़ और चैतन्य के रूप में ...

----- TERM: established value -----
[MVD p19 ?] ... ● The realisation in the established values in coexistence ● Evidence of resolution, prosperity, fearlessness and coexistence – this itself is universal wellbeing. ● Liberation from delusion and eternal awakening. 30.  शक्षा में पूण ता ● चेतना  वकास मूल्य  शक्षा । ● कारीगरी ( तकनीकी )...
[MVD p306 Chapter-18] ...van evidences absolute-accordance with awakening, which manifests in human tradition. In the deluded state, one considers over-evaluation, under-evaluation, and mis-evaluation to be values. However, after awakening, one recognises jeevan values, human values, established values, civic values, and the usefulness & aesthetics value. This itself is the evidence of absolute-oneness and absolute-connectedness. Coexistence is eternally proximate. The continuity of awakening itself is absolute-observance. Absolute-oneness...

----- TERM: relationship -----
[MVD p56 Chapter-4] ...नव का प्रयोजन । Indivisibility ( akhandta ): - The human purpose in the form of essence and elaboration of universality. ○ सामािजकता :- सम्पक  एवं संबंध में  न हत मूल्यों का  नवा ह ही सामािजकता है । Sociality ( samajikta ): - Fulfilling the values inherent in relationships and associations itself is sociality. ○ आवश्यकता :-  नवा ह के  लए समु चत साधनों के प्र त ( जो समझदार प रवार में  नधा  रत होता है ) तीव्र इच्छा ही आवश्यकता है । यह शरीर पोषण - संरक्षण समाज ग त के अथ  में । Needs ( avashyakta ): - The strong desire...
[MVD p61 Chapter-4] ...ity where expectations are voluntary, such union is referred to as association. ○ ऐ हक उद्देश्य ( जीव चेतना वश ) से संबंध नहीं है । संबंध आमुिष्मक उद्देश्य (  वक सत चेतना , मानव , देव मानव  दव्य मानव सहज प्रमाण ) पूव क ही हैं , िजनका  नवा ह ही जागृ त है । The relationships are not for mundane objectives of animal consciousness. Instead, relationships are for higher objectives, i.e. evidencing developed consciousness as humane-human, deific-human, and divine-human. Fulfilling these objectives itself is awakening. ○ ...
[MVD p62 Chapter-4] ... Relationship ( sambandh ): - The mutuality where expectations are predetermined in the sense of completeness, such union is referred to as relationship. ● सामािजकता का  नवा ह कत्त व्य एवं  नष्ठा से है , िजससे अखण्डता - साव भौमता रुप में सामािजकता का  वकास तथा ...
[MVD p63 Chapter-4] ...ा  नराकरण हो और स्नेह का ही संबंध हो , इसे सव  सुलभ कराने के  लये जो अथ   नयोजन है , उसकी परमाथ  संज्ञा है । Benevolent ( paramarth ): - The thoughts and behaviours that accomplish universal wellbeing along with resolution, offer solutions to problems, foster relationships based purely on affection, and utilise resources to make these accessible to all, are referred to as benevolent. उपरोक्त  नयम ही  व भन्न प्रकार की ग ठत सामािजक इकाईयों के  लये भी लागू होगा । िजससे  व भन्नता समाप्त होकर , मानवीयता स्था पत होेगी । ...
[MVD p72 Chapter-4] ...स्नेह और सेवा स हत व्यवहार , संबंध व संपक  का  नवा ह ही सहअिस्तत्व है । Coexistence ( sahastitva ): - The behaviour characterised by the absence of exploitation, accumulation & malice, and by the presence of generosity, affection, seva , along with fulfilling relationships and associations itself is coexistence. o  न व रोध :- न्याय एवं धम  के प्र त  नश्चय ,  नष्ठा एवं अभ्यास ही  न व रोध है । Absence of resistance ( nirvirodh ): - Certainty, dedication and practice towards justice and dharma itself is absence of res...
[MVD p91 Chapter-4] ... काय  करने में सक्षम होता है । प्रत्येक ‘ जीवन ’ शरीर द्वारा ही आशानुरुप उपलिब्ध के  लए प्रयत्नशील है तथा इसी हेतु वह अणु समूह से पृथक है । The physical, chemical, and jeevan activities are forever present in existence. In the course of understanding the interrelationships among these activities, the sentient unit irreversibly transitioned from physical and chemical activities recognises itself as 'jeevan'. Humans are the only entities that recognise and evidence this. The separation from the group of insentient at...

----- TERM: justice -----
[MVD p15 ?] ... ● Nature itself is destiny. ● Destiny itself is orderliness. ● Orderliness itself is development and awakening. ● Development and awakening itself is the universe. ● The law itself is justice, justice itself is dharma, dharma itself is truth, truth itself is abundance (coexistence), realisation of abundance itself is bliss, bliss itself is jeevan, and law is in jeevan . ● Deluded humans are independent when performing actions, but dependent...
[MVD p21 ?] ...छा एवं सहअिस्तत्व में पूण  सम्म त को सफल बनाने की आप्त कामना के आधार पर मध्यस्थ दश न को प्रकट करने का शुभ अवसर मुझे प्राप्त हुआ है । ” I have got an auspicious opportunity to present Madhyasth Darshan, which is based on the noble wish to quench the thirst for justice found in every person, satisfy the desire for resolution and prosperity in every family, and attain complete acceptance in coexistence, while also striving towards a classless society. “ सहअिस्तत्व सूत्र व्याख्या ही स्वयं में सामरस्यता है। ” सामरस्यता ...
[MVD p31 ?] ... क्लेश - मुिक्त - Liberation from Suffering 11. योग - Yog 12. लक्षण , लोक , आलोक एवं लक्ष्य - Characteristics, World, Enlightenment and Goal 13. मानवीयता - Humaneness 14. मानव व्यवहार सहज  नयम - The Natural Laws of Human Behaviour 15. मानव सहज न्याय - Natural Justice in Humans 16. पोषण एवं शोषण - Nurturing and Exploitation (1) मानव धम  नी त - Humane Moral policy (2) मानव राज्य नी त - Humane State Policy 17. रहस्य - मुिक्त - Liberation from Mystery 18. सुख - शािन्त - सन्तोष और आनन्द - Happiness, Peace, Contentment a...
[MVD p33 Chapter-1] ... is eternal , and this itself is knowledge. Law, regulation, balance, justice, dharma and ultimate truth are evident in coexistence only. o जड़ : - इकाईयाँ जो अपनी लंबाई , चौड़ाई , ऊँचाई की सीमा में  क्रयाशील हैं । Insentient ( jad ): - The units that are active within the bounds of their length, width and height. o चैतन्य : - इका...
[MVD p34 Chapter-1] ...संपूण  प्रकृ त सम्पृक्त अ वभाज्य रूप में  वद्यमान है । यही सहअिस्तत्व है । The omnipresent Omnipotence is inherent in, by, for an awakened human as law at the time of vocation, as resolution at the time of thinking, as bliss at the time of realisation, and as justice at the time of behaviour. This is because the entire nature is inseparably present in Omnipotence, which itself is coexistence. ○ काल :-  क्रया की अव ध की काल संज्ञा है । Time ( kaal ): - Duration of an activity is referred to as time. ○  नयम :- आचरण औ...
[MVD p35 Chapter-1] ... Justice ( nyaya ): - Humane behaviour in mutuality itself is justice. ○ मानवीयतापूण  व्यवहार :- धीरता , वीरता , उदारता , दया , कृपा , करुणा पूण  स्वभाव ; न्याय , धम  एवं सत्यतापूण  दृिष्ट और  वत्तेषणा , पुत्रेषणा एवं लोकेषणात्मक प्रवृ त्त से युक्त व्यवहार ही म...

----- TERM: trust -----
[MVD p59 Chapter-4] ... है । Incapacity ( akshamta ): - Incapacity refers to the inability to perform intellectual activity or the desired work and behaviour. Disease and unawakening are the causes of incapacity. ○ हीनता :-  वश्वासघात ही हीनता है । Perfidy ( heenta ): - Betrayal of trust itself is perfidy. ○  वश्वासघात :- िजससे िजस  क्रया की अपेक्षा है , उसके  वपरीत आचरण  कया जाना ही  वश्वासघात है । Betrayal of trust ( vishwasghat ): - The conduct contrary to what is expected from someone itself is betrayal. ○ छल :-  वश्वासघात के अनन्तर ...
[MVD p65 Chapter-4] ...on and telecommunication. ○ पुत्रेषणा :- प रवार एवं समाज व्यवस्था के अथ  में जन - बल कामना एवं वंश वृद् ध में  वश्वास की पुत्रेषणा संज्ञा है । Progeny-motive ( putreshna ): - The wish for people’s strength for the family and societal orderliness, along with a trust in the continuation of the lineage, is referred to as the progeny-motive. ○ लोकेषणा :- अखण्ड समाज व्यवस्था के अथ  में न्याय , धम  दृिष्ट पूव क यश - बल कामना ही लोकेषणा है । Reputation-motive ( lokeshna ): - The wish for recognition for undivided society ...
[MVD p72 Chapter-4] ... Coexistence leads to absence of resistance, absence of resistance leads to awakening, awakening manifests as resolution and prosperity, resolution and prosperity is realisation of happiness and peace, happiness and peace lead to affection, affection leads to trust, trust leads to enlightenment of coexistence. The evidence of enlightenment and realisation in coexistence itself is awakening. o सहअिस्तत्व : - परस्परता में शोषण , संग्रह एवं द्वेष र हत तथा उदारता , स्नेह और सेवा स हत व्यवहार , संबंध व संपक  का  नवा ह ह...
[MVD p73 Chapter-4] ... Affection ( sneha ): - Affection is the consequence of absence of resistance in just behaviour. It is an activity of mun in an awakened jeevan that is inspired from vritti . o  वश्वास :- परस्परता में  न हत मूल्य प्रत्याशा के  नवा ह  क्रया ही  वश्वास है । Trust ( vishwas ): - Trust is the act of fulfilling the inherent expectation of values in mutuality. o सेवा :- उपकार कर संतुष्ट होने वाली प्रवृ त्त एवं प्र तफल के आधार पर  कया गया सहयोग सहका रता सेवा है । उपकार प्रधान सेवा में उपकार करने की संतुिष्ट  मलती है ।...
[MVD p80 Chapter-4] ...bility and receptivity towards the name, form, properties, and essential nature of the ideal. o ईष्ट :-  नभ्रा न्त ज्ञान स हत स्वेच्छापूव क सहअिस्तत्व के प्र त श्रद्धा ,  वश्वास एवं  नष्ठा ही ईष्ट है । Ideal ( isht ): - The ideal is the self-driven reverence, trust, and dedication towards coexistence, along with the complete knowledge. o तादात्म्य , तद्रूप :- जागृ त ही परम उपलिब्ध होने के कारण तद्रूप , अनुभव बोध से तादात्म्य होना जीवन सहज तथा अनुभव सहज  क्रया है । सहअिस्तत्व में अनुभव ही तद्रूप , तदाकार  व ध है । क...
[MVD p136 Chapter-9] ... :-  व ध मानव चेतना , देव चेतना एवम्  दव्य चेतना क्रम में है ।  व ध में जो  वश्वास है , उसकी सुसंस्कृत सुसंस्कार संज्ञा है । Susanskrut sanskar : - The righteousness is in the purview of humane consciousness, deific consciousness and divine consciousness. The trust in righteousness is referred to as susanskrut sanskar . ● मानवीयतापूण  प्रवृ त्त एवम् व्यवहार की न्याय तथा अमानवीय प्रवृ त्त एवम् व्यवहार की अन्याय संज्ञा है । The tendency and behaviour of humaneness is referred to as justice, whereas tendency and behav...

----- TERM: respect -----
[MVD p42 Chapter-3] ... atoms is referred to as elemental state. ○  मश्रण :-  वजातीय परमािण्वक अथवा आिण्वक समूह का ऐसा गठन िजसमें सभी अपने - अपने आचरण को बनाये रखते हैं । Mixture state ( mishran ): - Composition of a heterogeneous group of molecules in which they all maintain their respective conducts. ○ यौ गक :- दो या अ धक प्रजा त की वस्तुयें  निश्चत अनुपात से  मलकर , अपने - अपने आचरण को त्याग कर , अन्य प्रकार के आचरण को प्रस्तुत करते हैं । Compound state ( yaugik ): - The compound state is achieved when two or more kinds of entities co...
[MVD p43 Chapter-3] ...  वलगीकरण संभव न हो , वह उसकी धारणा है । जो चारों पदों में अपने - अपने िस्थ त के अनुसार स्पष्ट है । Innateness ( dharana ): - That whose separation is not possible from an entity, is its innateness. Innateness is apparent in the four orders according to their respective statuses. ○ समस्या :-  कसी भी घटना अथवा  क्रया की समझ न होना ही समस्या है अथवा कैसे और क्यों समझ में न आना समस्या है । Problem ( samasya ): - Not having the understanding of any occurrence or activity itself is the problem, or not being able to unde...
[MVD p46 Chapter-3] ...to all entities for the basic impulsion. ○ मूल चेष्टा :- पदाथ  के परमािण्वक िस्थ त में वातावरण के दबाव से मुक्त चेष्टा की मूल चेष्टा संज्ञा है । Basic impulsion ( mool cheshta ): - Basic impulsion refers to the activity in the atomic state of matter that is irrespective of environmental pressure. page- 46 ...
[MVD p49 Chapter-3] ...terial order, the differentiating feature in biological order is the activity of selection, which is the activity of manomaya kosha . This is evident in the form of different vegetation growing in the same soil absorbing nutrients and rasas according to their respective needs. ○ जीवावस्था व भ्र मत ज्ञानावस्था में चार कोषों की  क्रया स्पष्ट है । यह है - अन्नमय कोष , प्राणमय कोष , मनोमय कोष और आनंदमय कोष । page- 49 ...
[MVD p61 Chapter-4] ...याय व अन्याय स हत लक्ष्य भेद से संपक  सफल एवं असफल  सद्ध होता है , िजससे सामािजकता का  वकास व ह्रास  सद्ध होता है । An association succeeds or fails depending on whether its goal is with justice or injustice, which leads to development or decline of sociality respectively. ○ सम्पक  :- िजस परस्परता में प्रत्याशाएँ ऐिच्छक रूप में  न हत है , ऐसे  मलन की संपक  संज्ञा है । Association ( sampark ): - The mutuality where expectations are voluntary, such union is referred to as association. ○ ऐ हक उद्देश्य ( जीव चेतना वश )...
[MVD p66 Chapter-4] ...रय ,  वषय सापेक्ष ;  हता हत , शरीर सापेक्ष ; लाभालाभ , वस्तु व सेवा सापेक्ष ; न्यायान्याय , व्यवहार सापेक्ष ; धमा धम  , समाधान सापेक्ष तथा सत्यासत्य , अिस्तत्व में अनुभव सापेक्ष पद्ध त से स्पष्ट होता है । The pleasant-unpleasant perspective becomes clear with respect to instincts; healthy-unhealthy perspective becomes clear with respect to the body; profit-loss perspective becomes clear with respect to material goods and comforts; justice-injustice perspective becomes clear with respect to behaviour; dharma-adharma...

----- TERM: recognis -----
[MVD p3 ?] ...ed the human being as an animal.  वकल्प के रूप में प्राप्त अिस्तत्वमूलक मानव केिन्द्रत  चंतन  व ध से मध्यस्थ दश न , सहअिस्तत्ववाद में मानव को ज्ञानावस्था में होने का पहचान  कया एवं कराया। Madhyasth Darshan Co-existentialism obtained in the form of alternative recognised humans to be in knowledge order by way of existence based human-centric contemplation. मध्यस्थ दश न के अनुसार मानव ही ज्ञाता , ( जानने वाला ), सह - अिस्तत्वरूपी अिस्तत्व जानने मानने योग्य वस्तु अथा त् जानने के  लए संपूण  वस्तु है यही ज्ञेय दश न ज्ञा...
[MVD p9 ?] ...ssion, Development ● Awakening progression, Awakening and the eternal grandeur of awakened human tradition as orderly living with human-ness and participation in the overall orderliness was understood. I accepted this as the essence of universal wellbeing and recognised the natural expectation for goodness in all humans. As a result, I have presented to humankind the formulation and elaboration of consciousness development, value education, humane constitution, humane conduct, and humane orderliness. भू म स्वग  हो ...
[MVD p33 Chapter-1] ...पय  सत्तामयता है । Sentient ( chaitanya ): - The units that are active in space beyond the bounds of their length, width and height in a subtle body form. Here space means Omnipotence. ● जागृत मानव ही दृष्टा पद प्र तष्ठा में गण्य है । Only awakened humans are recognisable in the seer status. ○ मानव : - मनाकार को साकार करने तथा मन : स्वस्थता का आशावादी और प्रमा णत करने वाले को मानव संज्ञा है । Human ( manav ): -The one who materialises ideas, aspires for mental wellbeing and evidences it is referred to as human. ○ व...
[MVD p35 Chapter-1] ..., progeny-motive and reputation-motive is humane behaviour. ○ अिस्तत्व में , से , के  लए जानने , पहचानने और अनुभव करने का प्रयास व अध्ययन मानव करता रहा है एवं करता रहेगा । Humans have always been and shall continue making efforts to study, i.e. to understand, recognise and realise in, by, for existence. ○ ज्ञान को अनुभव काल में आनंद ; सव त्र एक सा अनुभव में आने के कारण सत्य ; ज्ञान में समस्त  क्रयायें संर क्षत और  नयं त्रत होने के कारण लोकेश ; सव त्र एक सा  वद्यमान होने के कारण व्यापक ; चैतन्य के साथ चेतना ; आत्मा ...
[MVD p40 Chapter-3] ... to as Space. ● सापेक्ष एवं  नरपेक्ष भेद से ऊजा  है । इसे सापेक्ष ऊजा  व  नरपेक्ष ऊजा  के रूप में पहचानना और समझना होता है । काय  ऊजा  सापेक्ष है तथा व्यापक रूप में  नरपेक्ष ऊजा   नत्य वत मान है । Energy is differentiated as relative and absolute. It is to be recognised and understood as relative energy and absolute energy. Work-energy is relative, while absolute energy is eternally present as Space. ○ सापेक्ष ऊजा  :- ईकाइयों की परस्परता के  बना िजस शिक्त का प्रगटन न हो , वह सापेक्ष ऊजा  है । भौ तक रासाय नक वस्तुओं...
[MVD p55 Chapter-4] ... अध्याय - चार Chapter-4 मानव सहज प्रयोजन The Human Purpose ●  वश्राम के  लये ही इस पृथ्वी पर मानव अपने महत्व को जानने , पहचानने के प्रयास एवं प्रयोग में व्यस्त है । Humans on this Earth are engaged in endeavours and experiments to know and recognise their significance, solely for attaining restfulness. ● एक से अ धक मानव एकत्र या संग ठत होने को प रवार , समुदाय व अखण्ड समाज संज्ञा है । जागृत मानव परम्परा में साव भौम व्यवस्था पूव क अखण्ड समाज प्रमा णत होता है । More than one human coming together o...

----- TERM: fulfil -----
[MVD p20 ?] ...f diversity in their civilisations and an intense expansionist tendency towards ownership and property. Since time immemorial, the formation of human communities has invariably centred around the pursuit of freedom from fear. Initially, inventions happened to fulfil basic necessities such as food, shelter, and adornment, alongside violent means to overcome the fear posed by wild animals and natural forces. War is nothing more than the use of these violent means in conflicts between individuals, families, groups, or...
[MVD p24 ?] ... happiness, (3) For becoming capable of living with firmness towards righteous wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour, (4) For developing the well-defined path from inhumaneness to humaneness, humaneness to higher-humaneness. (5) For fulfilling one’s responsibilities in the undivided society and universal orderliness effortlessly. (6) For evidencing the desired humane culture and civilisation along with their knowledge. (7) For becoming proficient in the law, orderliness and policy aspects...
[MVD p34 Chapter-1] ... to as time. ○  नयम :- आचरण और  क्रया की  नयंत्रण पृष्ठभू म ही  नयम है । Law ( niyam ): - The foundation for the regulation of conduct and activities itself is the law. ○ समाधान :- क्यों और कैसे की पू त  ( उत्तर ) ही समाधान है । Resolution ( samadhan ): - The fulfilment (answer) of why and how itself is resolution. ○ आनंद :- सहअिस्तत्व रूपी परम सत्यानुभू त ही आनंद है । Bliss ( anand ): - The realisation in coexistence, as ultimate truth, itself is bliss. ○ न्याय :- परस्परता में मानवीयतापूण  व्यवहार ही न्याय है । pa...
[MVD p56 Chapter-4] ...ौमता सहज सूत्र व्याख्या रूप में मानव का प्रयोजन । Indivisibility ( akhandta ): - The human purpose in the form of essence and elaboration of universality. ○ सामािजकता :- सम्पक  एवं संबंध में  न हत मूल्यों का  नवा ह ही सामािजकता है । Sociality ( samajikta ): - Fulfilling the values inherent in relationships and associations itself is sociality. ○ आवश्यकता :-  नवा ह के  लए समु चत साधनों के प्र त ( जो समझदार प रवार में  नधा  रत होता है ) तीव्र इच्छा ही आवश्यकता है । यह शरीर पोषण - संरक्षण समाज ग त के अथ  में । Needs (...
[MVD p61 Chapter-4] ...ण ) पूव क ही हैं , िजनका  नवा ह ही जागृ त है । The relationships are not for mundane objectives of animal consciousness. Instead, relationships are for higher objectives, i.e. evidencing developed consciousness as humane-human, deific-human, and divine-human. Fulfilling these objectives itself is awakening. ○ संबंध :- िजस परस्परता में प्रत्याशाएँ पूण ता के अथ  में पूव   निश्चत रहती हैं , ऐसे  मलन की संबंध संज्ञा है । page- 61 ...
[MVD p62 Chapter-4] ...: - The mutuality where expectations are predetermined in the sense of completeness, such union is referred to as relationship. ● सामािजकता का  नवा ह कत्त व्य एवं  नष्ठा से है , िजससे अखण्डता - साव भौमता रुप में सामािजकता का  वकास तथा अन्यथा से ह्रास है । The fulfilment of sociality is through duty and dedication, which leads to the development of sociality in the form of indivisibility and universality. Otherwise, its decline occurs. ○  नवा ह :- समाधान , समृद् ध स हत उपयोग , सद्उपयोग व प्रयोजनों को प्रमा णत करना अ...

----- TERM: usefulness -----
[MVD p47 Chapter-3] ...tive, or mediative. This is the effect that arises from the coming together of more than one entity. ○ स्वभाव :- मौ लकता ही स्वभाव है । :- गुणों की उपयो गता की स्वभाव संज्ञा है । Essential nature ( svabhav ): - Essentiality itself is the essential nature. : - Usefulness of properties is referred to as essential nature. ○ धम  :- धारणा ही धम  है । Dharma : - Innateness itself is dharma . page- 47 ...
[MVD p56 Chapter-4] ...ग :- मानव की आवश्यकता के रूप में प्राकृ तक ऐश्वय  पर श्रम  नयोजन पूव क उपयो गता मूल्य व कला मूल्य को स्था पत करने हेतु सफल होते तक प्रयास ही प्रयोग है । Experimentation ( prayog ): - The endeavour, until success is achieved, to meet a human need by instilling usefulness and aesthetic value on natural abundance through the deployment of labour, itself is experimentation. ○ उत्पादन :- प्रयोग को सामान्यीकृत करने हेतु  वक सत  क्रया पद्ध त मेें श्रम  नयोजन प्र क्रया की उत्पादन संज्ञा है िजसमें बहुतायत उत्पादन की अथवा  न...
[MVD p57 Chapter-4] ...d in transportation and telecommunication are referred to as special aspiration. ○ अथ पाज न :- प्राकृ तक ऐश्वय  पर उपाय पूव क श्रम  नयोजन से कला एवं उपयो गता की  सद्ध मात्रा की धनोपाज न संज्ञा हैं । Earning of wealth ( arthoparjan ): - The definite measure of usefulness and aesthetic value realised from natural abundance through the planned deployment of human labour is referred to as earning of wealth. ○ उपयोग :- उत्पादन व सेवा के  लए प्रयुक्त अथ  की उपयोग संज्ञा है । Use ( upyog ): - The deployment of means for p...
[MVD p66 Chapter-4] ...that realises in coexistence is referred to as atma , and the omnipotent foundation of all atmas is the Spirit or Paramatma . ○ आवश्यकता तथा उपयो गता का  नण य उपरोक्त तीन तृिप्तकारक अथवा सुखकारक लक्ष्य भेद से  नण य  कया जाता है । The determination of need and usefulness is based on the three aforementioned goals (physical, intellectual, and spiritual) that lead to satisfaction and happiness. ● ऐिन्द्रक तृिप्त क्ष णक , बौद् धक तृिप्त दीघ  प रणामी तथा आध्याित्मक ( अनुभव ) तृिप्त  नत्य अथवा अप रणामी  सद्ध होती है । Se...
[MVD p74 Chapter-4] ...क्तक एवं अखण्ड समाज अथ  का पोषण , सद्व्यय परस्परता में तृिप्त के रूप में प्रमा णत होती है । उपरोक्तानुसार व्यवस्था की उपादेयता  व ध के आशय को काय रूप प्रदान करने हेतु समझदार परंपरा को स्था पत करना है ।  व ध पक्ष का वैभव जागृत परंपरा में प्रमा णत होता है । The usefulness of the aspect of way becomes evident in the form of wisdom-aligned fostering of individual and societal resources, righteous expenditure, and satisfaction in mutuality. As mentioned above, the usefulness of the orderliness lies in establishing a tra...
[MVD p84 Chapter-4] ...काँक्षाएं हैं । All aspirations of happiness are differentiated as the acts of embracing, discarding, self-restraint, grace, accumulation and generosity. o ग्रहण :- उपयो गता के मूल्यांकन की ग्रहण संज्ञा है । Embracing ( grihan ): - Refers to the evaluation of usefulness. o  वसज न :- अनुपयो गता की  वसज न संज्ञा है । Discarding ( visarjan ): - Refers to assessment that something is not useful. o  नग्रह :- स्वसंयमता के अथ  में प्रवृ त्त । Self-restraint ( nigraha ): - Refers to the tendency of self-discipline. ● आशाएँ...

----- TERM: complementarin -----
[MVD p73 Chapter-4] ... तक व्यवस्था । Two kinds of societal arrangements are apparent throughout the deluded human tradition: (1) the religio-moral order and (2) the politico-state order. ● सामािजकता के संरक्षण के  लये दोनों व्यवस्थाओं का परस्पर पूरक होना अत्यावश्यक है । The mutual complementariness of these two orders is absolutely necessary for the preservation of sociality. page- 73 ...
[MVD p81 Chapter-4] ...n from delusion itself is the mediative state and motion. Attaining the mediative state entails liberation from the frustration of generative and degenerative activities. Jeevan attains contentment upon awakening by ways of use, right-use, purposeful-use, and complementariness. In an awakened jeevan, there is contentment and balance only through the mediative way i.e. through the atma-bodh or enlightenment of realisation. o जागृ त क्रम में सव मानव रूप , बल , धन , पद के बढ़ने को सम  क्रया तथा इनके बने रहने को मध्यस्थ...
[MVD p92 Chapter-4] ... Whatever acceptances of inertial-impressions are there in the sentient (jeevan), they are incomplete. The sentient unit wants further development. The developed units use undeveloped units for the purpose of awakening by way of complementariness. For awakening, internal-deployment of energy is necessary in every human being - since the decline becomes apparent if a unit’s powers flow outward, and development becomes apparent if a unit’s powers are turned inward. Internal-deployment m...
[MVD p107 Chapter-5] ...ed on the policy aligned with justice. ● बौद् धक समाधान के  लए व्यवहा रक एकसूत्रता अ नवाय  है । एकसूत्रता अपने में ज्ञान -  वज्ञान -  ववेक में संगीत है अथवा पूरकता है । Behavioural integrality is mandatory for intellectual resolution. Integrality in itself is complementariness, or harmony in knowledge, wisdom, and science. ● वैचा रक एवं व्यवहा रक संतुलन के  लए मानवीयता की सुरक्षा तथा संरक्षण की नी त एवं री त आवश्यक है । The policies and norms for the security and protection of humaneness are necessary for intellect...
[MVD p182 Chapter-13] ... Mutual complementariness and usefulness is the integrality in behaviour in humans. Integrality in behaviour leads to success, else there is movement towards failure. ● सहअिस्तत्व में  वरोध नहीं , एकसूत्रता है । अत : सहअिस्तत्व मानव जीवन में व्यवहार का लक्ष्य  सद्ध हु...
[MVD p242 Chapter-16] ...nt self-evident formula, which is: - Humankind is united in the right and divided in the wrong. The reason for their being “many” (mutually contradictory) is mystery and consumerism only. Upon awakening, all “many” become “one” by way of mutual usefulness and complementariness. मानव धम  - नी त Humane Moral policy प रभाषा The Definition ● अथ  की सदुपयोगात्मक नी त ही धम नी त है । Policy for right-use of resources itself is the Moral policy. ○ मानव की साव भौ मक साम्य कामना सुख की अनुभू त हेतु मानव के समस्त सम्पक  एवं ...

----- TERM: developmental progression -----
(no hits)

----- TERM: constitution -----
[MVD p6 ?] ...त न धयों की  नवा चन प्र क्रया में वोट नोट कागठबंधन होना। ये कैसा जनतंत्र है ? One more question arose in me from the circumstances of those times. The fourth question - Following India's independence, a constituent assembly was established. While drafting the Constitution, the assembly assumed that the public representatives were qualified to govern the nation, even though they did not define or describe the nation, nationhood, or national character. How valid is the public verdict or the public representative who ...
[MVD p7 ?] ... The Constitution of India proclaimed equality, yet it also described the process and provisions for reservation. In a democratic system, public representatives are elected through a process that involves a nexus of votes and money. What kind of democracy is this? ...
[MVD p8 ?] ... saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and overfull atoms, and the development ( vikas ) of the atom itself as satiated, constitutionally complete atoms, i.e., 'jeevan' in its being and abiding. In coexistence itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of ‘jeevan’. In coexistence itself : - It is understood that the entire phys...
[MVD p9 ?] ...derstood. I accepted this as the essence of universal wellbeing and recognised the natural expectation for goodness in all humans. As a result, I have presented to humankind the formulation and elaboration of consciousness development, value education, humane constitution, humane conduct, and humane orderliness. भू म स्वग  हो , मनुष्य देवता हो page- 9 ...
[MVD p13 ?] ...nowledge of jeevan in coexistence ● Knowledge of holistic view of existence in the form of coexistence ● Knowledge of humane conduct ● Realisation itself is knowledge 11. अनुसंधान ● गठन पूण ता । ●  क्रया पूण ता । ● आचरण पूण ता । The Finding from Exploration ● Constitutional completeness page- 13 ...
[MVD p14 ?] ...tom in the developed form itself is the sentient unit. ● The sentient unit i.e. jeevan itself evidences undivided society in human tradition upon awakening. ● Alertful humaneness, deific humaneness and sociality. ● Divine humaneness with complete awareness. ● Constitutional completeness, Activity completeness, and Conduct completeness. 14. सत्यता ● सत्ता में सम्पृक्त प्रकृ त ही सृिष्ट । ● प्रकृ त ही  नय त । ●  नय त ही व्यवस्था । ● व्यवस्था ही  वकास एवं जागृ त । ●  वकास एवं जागृ त ही सृिष्ट है । ●  नयम ही न्याय , न्...

----- TERM: atom -----
[MVD p8 ?] ...ं का रचना स्पष्ट होना समझ में आया। Coexistence : - Entire insentient and sentient nature was understood to be saturated and eternally present in the Omnipresence reality. In coexistence itself : - I understood the development-progression ( vikas kram ) in the atom in the form of hungry and overfull atoms, and the development ( vikas ) of the atom itself as satiated, constitutionally complete atoms, i.e., 'jeevan' in its being and abiding. In coexistence itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit...
[MVD p14 ?] ... मानव परम्परा में अखण्ड सामािजकता सहज प्रमाण । ● सतक तापूण  मानवीयता , देव मानवीयता एवं सामािजकता । ● सजगतापूण   दव्य मानवीयता । ● गठन पूण ता ,  क्रया पूण ता एवं आचरण पूण ता । The Postulations ● The physicochemical nature itself is in development progression. Atom in the developed form itself is the sentient unit. ● The sentient unit i.e. jeevan itself evidences undivided society in human tradition upon awakening. ● Alertful humaneness, deific humaneness and sociality. ● Divine humaneness with complete awareness. ●...
[MVD p26 ?] ...रमाणु में पाये जाने वाला मध्यांश ( ना भक ) मध्यस्थ  क्रया है । इस लये सम -  वषमात्मक  क्रयाएं एवं सापेक्ष शिक्तयाँ  नयं त्रत एवं संर क्षत हैं । Omnipotence is mediative, therefore the nature saturated in it is regulated and conserved. The nucleus within every atom is the mediative activity, whereby the atom’s generative-degenerative activities and relative powers are regulated and conserved. अनन्त  क्रया अथवा  क्रया - समूह ही प्रकृ त है , जो जड़ और चैतन्य के रूप में गण्य है । जड़ प्रकृ त ही  वकास पूण ता के अनन्तर चैत...
[MVD p27 ?] ... In development progression, development (in atom) itself is constitutional completeness. In awakening progression, awakening in deluded humans itself is activity completeness and conduct completeness. An awakened human nurtures right-use and purposeful-use through their work with less developed nature. ...
[MVD p41 Chapter-3] ... ○ संपूण  पदाथ  अपनी परमािण्वक िस्थ त में सचेष्ट हैं । इस लए स्पष्ट होता है  क उन्हें ऊजा  प्राप्त है । िजस ऊजा  ( शिक्त ) से समस्त पदाथ  अपने परमािण्वक िस्थ त में सचेष्ट है वह ही  नरपेक्ष ऊजा  है । All matter is active in its atomic state, which implies they inherently have the energy. The energy with which matter is active in its atomic state is referred to as absolute energy. ○ उक्त री त से पदाथ  एवं  नरपेक्ष ऊजा  का सहअिस्तत्व सदा - सदा अ वभाज्य रूप में होना  सद्ध होता है । Acco...
[MVD p42 Chapter-3] ... All matter exists in solid, liquid, or gaseous (air) forms and can be found in elemental, compound, or mixture states. ○ ताित्वक :- सजातीय परमािण्वक समूह के गठन की ताित्वक संज्ञा है । Elemental state ( tatvik ): - Composition of a homogeneous group of atoms is referred to as elemental state. ○  मश्रण :-  वजातीय परमािण्वक अथवा आिण्वक समूह का ऐसा गठन िजसमें सभी अपने - अपने आचरण को बनाये रखते हैं । Mixture state ( mishran ): - Composition of a heterogeneous group of molecules in which they all maintain their r...

----- TERM: molecule -----
[MVD p8 ?] ... itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of ‘jeevan’. In coexistence itself : - It is understood that the entire physical, chemical and biological order compositions are made of hungry and overfull atoms, molecules and biological cells, and this Earth and every other planet are compositions of atoms and molecules. 13. अिस्तत्व में भौ तक रचना रुपी धरती पर ही यौ गक  व ध से रसायन तंत्र प्र क्रया स हत प्राणकोषाओं से र चत रचनायें संपूण  वन - वनस्प तयों के रूप में सम...
[MVD p42 Chapter-3] ... ): - Composition of a homogeneous group of atoms is referred to as elemental state. ○  मश्रण :-  वजातीय परमािण्वक अथवा आिण्वक समूह का ऐसा गठन िजसमें सभी अपने - अपने आचरण को बनाये रखते हैं । Mixture state ( mishran ): - Composition of a heterogeneous group of molecules in which they all maintain their respective conducts. ○ यौ गक :- दो या अ धक प्रजा त की वस्तुयें  निश्चत अनुपात से  मलकर , अपने - अपने आचरण को त्याग कर , अन्य प्रकार के आचरण को प्रस्तुत करते हैं । Compound state ( yaugik ): - The compound state is ach...
[MVD p197 Chapter-14] ...ction and maturation from togetherness of atomic formations is referred to as ‘relative cause’. ● अनेक अणु - परमाणुओं से संग ठत  पण्ड व उनकी  क्रया को ‘ स्थूल -  क्रया ’ और परमािण्वक  क्रया को ‘ सूक्ष्म -  क्रया ’ संज्ञा है । The body composed of many atoms & molecules and their activity is referred to as ‘gross activity’, and the activity of atoms is referred to as ‘subtle activity’. ● ग त , कंपन और तरंग भेद से सूक्ष्म ग तयाँ तथा  क्रयाएँ हैं । Subtle motions and activities occur through the distinctions of motion...
[MVD p201 Chapter-14] ...त ’ संज्ञा है । Deed ( kruti ): - The activity performed according to thought is referred to as ‘deed’. ○ आकृ त :-  क्रया द्वारा अनेक अणु - परमाणु समूहों के संग ठत रूप की ‘ आकृ त ’ संज्ञा है । Object ( akruti ): - The form composed of groups of many atoms and molecules through activity is referred to as ‘object’. ○ मानवीयतापूण  तथा अ तमानवीयतापूण   वचारों के अनुरूप काय  की ‘ सुकृ त ’ तथा अमानवीयतावादी  वचारों के अनुरूप  कये गये काय  की ‘ दुष्कृ त ’ संज्ञा है । The work according to thoughts of humaneness and higher...

----- TERM: cell -----
[MVD p8 ?] ...ionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of ‘jeevan’. In coexistence itself : - It is understood that the entire physical, chemical and biological order compositions are made of hungry and overfull atoms, molecules and biological cells, and this Earth and every other planet are compositions of atoms and molecules. 13. अिस्तत्व में भौ तक रचना रुपी धरती पर ही यौ गक  व ध से रसायन तंत्र प्र क्रया स हत प्राणकोषाओं से र चत रचनायें संपूण  वन - वनस्प तयों के रूप में समृद्घ होने के उपरांत प्राण...
[MVD p79 Chapter-4] ... जीवन में वंशानुषंगी काय  प्रवृ त्त रहती है । चैतन्य परमाणु ( जीवावस्था ) में चतुथ  , तृतीय , द् वतीय प रवेशों के अंश आं शक रूप में स क्रय रहते हैं और इससे श्रेष्ठ अ भव्यिक्त के  लए अग्रे षत रहते हैं । The bodies in the animal order are composed of biological cells only, and the "jeevan" there has a tendency for species-conformance. Particles in the fourth, third, and second orbits in the sentient atom (in animal order) are partially active and engaged in ascending for more evolved expressions. ● ज्ञानावस्था में भी...
[MVD p92 Chapter-4] ...्ष की रचना  व ध धा रत  कये हुए प्राणकोशाएं अविस्थत रहते हैं । इसी लए बीज पुन : उसी प्रकार की संरचना करने में समथ  होते हैं । यही बीज - वृक्ष न्याय कहलाता है । Vegetations are the entities of the biological order. These are fundamentally composed of biological cells. The units of the biological order are built from entities of the material order. To maintain the continuity of biological cells, the composition activity happens continuously. This definite effort eventually reaches a specific stage of growth, which we ...
[MVD p93 Chapter-4] ...e order. While the principle of seed coordination remains the same across these orders, there are fundamental differences in their state and behaviour. These variations are a spontaneous manifestation of differences in the composition method of the biological cells. o ज्ञानावस्था में मानव ही चारों अवस्थाओं का दृष्टा है । चैतन्य इकाई ( मानव ) में एकरूपता , जागृ त को पाने हेतु प्राप्त समझ ही संस्कार है । यह समझ ही मानव के  लए समाधान - समृद् ध पूव क जीने का कारण है । समझ के आधार पर व्यवहार - काय  होता है । इससे  सद्ध ...
[MVD p116 Chapter-5] ...्राणी अपने ढंग से पूरकता रचना एवं उपयोग में व्यस्त है तथा उसमें कुलीनता के प्र त तीव्र  नष्ठा या अक्षुण्ण  नष्ठा भी  सद्ध होती है । Similarly, growth as a process of collecting along with grouping is observed in the biological order. For example, a biological cell collects diverse mineral substances and composes them. We learn from this that every unit of the biological order is engaged in composing and collecting activity in its own distinctive manner, demonstrating a strong and unwavering dedication to its own ki...
[MVD p121 Chapter-6] ...kar is given by the awakened tradition. ○ अध्यास :- अध्यास का तात्पय  प्राणावस्था में काय रत प्राणकोशाओं में स्पष्ट रहता है । इसका स्वरूप प्राणसूत्रों में  न हत रचना  व ध है । Inertial-impression ( Adhyas ): - Inertial-impression is integral in the biological cells functioning in the biological order entities. It is essentially in the form of composition method ( rachna vidhi ) in the prana sutras . “ सव  शुभ हो ” "May there be universal wellbeing" page- 121 ...

----- TERM: order -----
[MVD p3 ?] ...्प के रूप में प्राप्त अिस्तत्वमूलक मानव केिन्द्रत  चंतन  व ध से मध्यस्थ दश न , सहअिस्तत्ववाद में मानव को ज्ञानावस्था में होने का पहचान  कया एवं कराया। Madhyasth Darshan Co-existentialism obtained in the form of alternative recognised humans to be in knowledge order by way of existence based human-centric contemplation. मध्यस्थ दश न के अनुसार मानव ही ज्ञाता , ( जानने वाला ), सह - अिस्तत्वरूपी अिस्तत्व जानने मानने योग्य वस्तु अथा त् जानने के  लए संपूण  वस्तु है यही ज्ञेय दश न ज्ञान है इसी के साथ जीवन ज्ञान व मानवीयता...
[MVD p7 ?] ...मानीय ऋ ष मह ष यों के सुझाव से - (1) अज्ञात को ज्ञात करने के  लए समा ध एक मात्र रास्ता बताये िजसे मैंने स्वीकार  कया। (2) साधना के अनुकूल स्थान के रूप में अमरकण्टक को स्वीकारा। (3) सन् 1950 से साधना कम  आरम्भ  कया। सन् 1960 के दशक में साधना में प्रौढता आई। In order to get rid of these questions, I approached the scholars, vedmurtis (apostles of Vedas), revered spiritual teachers and sages of the time, and from their suggestion: – (1) The only way to “know the unknown” is samadhi – which I accepted. (2) I accepted A...
[MVD p8 ?] ...s, i.e., 'jeevan' in its being and abiding. In coexistence itself : - The constitutionally complete atom or sentient unit is understood to be in the form of ‘jeevan’. In coexistence itself : - It is understood that the entire physical, chemical and biological order compositions are made of hungry and overfull atoms, molecules and biological cells, and this Earth and every other planet are compositions of atoms and molecules. 13. अिस्तत्व में भौ तक रचना रुपी धरती पर ही यौ गक  व ध से रसायन तंत्र प्र क्रया स हत प्राणक...
[MVD p9 ?] ...होना समझ में आया। इसे मैंने सव शुभ सूत्र माना और सव मानव में शुभापेक्षा होना स्वीकारा फलस्वरूप चेतना  वकास मूल्य  शक्षा , सं वधान , आचरण व्यवस्था सहज सूत्र व्याख्या , मानव सम्मुख प्रस्तुत  कया हूँ। The way of destiny : - through coexistence itself: - (i) Four orders in existence ● Material Order ● Biological order ● Animal Order ● Knowledge Order (ii) Four planes in existence ● Biological plane ● Delusion plane ● Deific plane ● Divine plane (iii) and ● Development progression, Development ● Awakening progression, A...
[MVD p11 ?] ...ature saturated in Omnipotence. The countless sentient and insentient units are saturated in Omnipotence (Omnipresence). ● All units saturated in the Omnipresence (permeative and transparent) have form, properties, essential nature & dharma, and have inherent orderliness & participate in overall orderliness. 4.  सद्धान्त ● श्रम - ग त - प रणाम । The Principle ● Effort - Motion - Result 5. उपदेश page- 11 ...
[MVD p15 ?] ... ● Nature itself is destiny. ● Destiny itself is orderliness. ● Orderliness itself is development and awakening. ● Development and awakening itself is the universe. ● The law itself is justice, justice itself is dharma, dharma itself is truth, truth itself is abundance (coexistence), realisation of abundance...

----- TERM: lineage -----
[MVD p65 Chapter-4] ...ेषणा :- प रवार एवं समाज व्यवस्था के अथ  में जन - बल कामना एवं वंश वृद् ध में  वश्वास की पुत्रेषणा संज्ञा है । Progeny-motive ( putreshna ): - The wish for people’s strength for the family and societal orderliness, along with a trust in the continuation of the lineage, is referred to as the progeny-motive. ○ लोकेषणा :- अखण्ड समाज व्यवस्था के अथ  में न्याय , धम  दृिष्ट पूव क यश - बल कामना ही लोकेषणा है । Reputation-motive ( lokeshna ): - The wish for recognition for undivided society and universal orderliness based o...

----- TERM: seed -----
[MVD p44 Chapter-3] ...le or infertile. o उव रा :- बीज को पाकर अनेक बीज को तैयार करने वाली क्षमता से सम्पन्न  मट्टी की उव रा संज्ञा है तथा इससे  वपरीत गुण स्वभाव वाली  मट्टी की ‘ अनुव रा ’ संज्ञा है । Fertile ( urvara ) : - Fertile soils are those that have the capacity to turn one seed into many, while soils with the opposite properties are referred to as infertile. page- 44 ...
[MVD p75 Chapter-4] ...ess itself is the root cause of energy in all sentient and insentient entities. As a result, matter in development progression through the activity of effort, motion and result emerges in the form of sentient world and insentient world. This explains that the seed and fruit form of the sentient and insentient world are inherent in the material world. Furthermore, it is evident that the seed of awakening is inherent in human jeevan, as every human desires to be awakened. This itself is the evidence of coexistence. o...
[MVD p80 Chapter-4] ...ted by the word “absolute”. ● ज्ञानावस्था की इकाई की समस्त  क्रयाओं का लक्ष्य  नब जन व्यवहार की उपलिब्ध है ।  नब जन का तात्पय  भ्रम मुिक्त और प्रमाण रूप में जागृ त है । यही आचरण पूण ता है । The goal of all activities of the knowledge order units is to achieve seedless ( nirbeejan ) behaviour, which means liberation from delusion with awakening as its evidence. This itself is conduct completeness. o सबीजन होने का तात्पय  :- शरीर को ‘ जीवन ’ मान लेना जब क ‘ शरीर ’ भौ तक - रासाय नक वस्तु की रचना है । ‘ जीवन ’ गठनपूण  ...
[MVD p81 Chapter-4] ... Seedful ( sabeejan ): - Seedful refers to the belief that the body is "jeevan," while in reality, the body is a composition of physical-chemical matter. Jeevan is a constitutionally complete atom - a sentient unit - which is seer of the physicochemical world. ...
[MVD p92 Chapter-4] ...ntities of the material order. To maintain the continuity of biological cells, the composition activity happens continuously. This definite effort eventually reaches a specific stage of growth, which we see in the form of plants and trees. Subsequently, their seeding stage comes. Seeds are formed in biological order with the aim of preserving their existence. They contain biological cells that carry the composition method of the entire tree, allowing them to recreate the same kind of tree composition. This is refer...
[MVD p93 Chapter-4] ...यवहार , जीवावस्था की िस्थ त एवं व्यवहार तथा ज्ञानावस्था की िस्थ त एवं व्यवहार में मौ लक अंतर हैं । अत : स्पष्ट है  क रचना  व ध के आधार पर  व वधताएँ हैं । यह स्वयंस्फूत   क्रया है । Heredity also plays a significant role in the body composition. The process of seed coordination, or heredity tradition, has its own uniqueness in the biological order, animal order, and knowledge order. While the principle of seed coordination remains the same across these orders, there are fundamental differences in their state and beh...

----- TERM: sanskar -----
[MVD p19 ?] ...की )  शक्षा । Completeness in Education ● Consciousness development value education ● Technical education 31. परम्परा में सम्पूण ता ● मानवीय  शक्षा संस्कार । ● मानवीय सं वधान । ● मानवीय प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था । Wholeness in Tradition ● Humane education sanskar ● Humane Constitution ● Humane family-based self-governance orderliness page- 19 ...
[MVD p90 Chapter-4] ...पक्ष ही करता है । It is the sentient aspect alone that experiences the art and knowledge aspect within these tendencies, in the form of happiness. ● चैतन्य पक्ष के जागृ त का जो कारण है , उसे संस्कार संज्ञा है । The cause of awakening of the sentient aspect is sanskar . ● जड़ पक्ष के प रणाम का जो कारण है , उसे अध्यास या वंशानुक्रम संज्ञा है जो गठनपूण ता तक है । The cause of the statuses of insentient aspect (body) is referred to as inertial-impression or heredity, which persists until constitutional completeness. o स...
[MVD p93 Chapter-4] ...प करता है । जागृ त  व ध से स्पष्ट होता है  क मानव वंश और जा त एक ही है तथा वैचा रक वै वध्यता भ्रमवश है । Humans in the knowledge order alone are the seers of the four orders. The understanding for attaining awakening as uniformity in humans, is referred to as sanskar . This understanding itself is the basis for humans to live with resolution and prosperity. The behaviour and work happens on the basis of understanding. The sentient unit ( jeevan ) is in the form of hope, thought, desire, resoluteness, and realisatio...
[MVD p94 Chapter-4] ...or progression of awakening through inspiration from the environment. ● जागृ त की  नरंतरता ही मानव परंपरा सहज म हमा है । The magnificence of human tradition lies in the continuity of awakening. ● जागृ त क्रम में संस्कार के दो भेद हैं :- There are two types of sanskar involved in the awakening progression: - o सुसंस्कार :- जागृ त योग्य प्रवृ त्तयाँ जो मानव द्वारा व्यवहृत हैं तथा  वचार रूप में अविस्थत हैं । समृद्ध , समाधा नत अथवा साथ क प्रवृ त्तयाँ सुसंस्कार हैं । Susanskar : - These are tendencies that are aligned w...
[MVD p108 Chapter-5] ...्रयास की संस्कार संज्ञा है तथा इसके आचरण , प्रचार और प्रदश न - पक्ष की संस्कृ त संज्ञा है । All study-based endeavours to protect humaneness, undertaken by a humane society or orderliness, while fulfilling every relationship and association are referred to as sanskar , and its conduct, publicity, and exhibition aspect are referred to as culture. ● संस्कृ त का पोषण सभ्यता से , सभ्यता का पोषण  व ध ( मानवीय आचार सं हता ) से ,  व ध का पोषण व्यवस्था से , आचरण का पोषण संस्कृ त से है , जो अन्योन्या श्रत व संबं धत है । Cul...
[MVD p119 Chapter-6] ...anding, which is the primary trigger for every subtle activity or thought. Coexistence is the fundamental trigger at the root of understanding. Thought is the background of an action, and background of thought is the cause. This, in itself, is the evidence of sanskar . ○ प्रभाव :-  कसी फल प रणाम को प्रकट करने के  लए पाये जाने वाले स्पष्ट प्रेरणा अथवा स्फुरण की प्रभाव संज्ञा है । हर घटना और फल प रणाम प्रेरणा और स्फुरण से ही प्रकट होता है । :-  क्रया की प्र त क्रया की प्रभाव संज्ञा है । Effect ( prabhav ): - The clea...

----- TERM: tradition -----
[MVD p4 ?] ... अनुसार - ज्ञान अव्यक्त अ नव चनीय  वकल्प के अनुसार - ज्ञान व्यक्त वचनीय अध्ययन  व ध से बोध गम्य , व्यवहार  व ध से प्रमाण सव  सुलभ होने के रुप में स्पष्ट हुआ . According to the idealistic scriptures and the mystery-based God-centric contemplation knowledge and tradition, the knowledge is unmanifest and ineffable. According to Madhyasth Darshan, the knowledge is manifest, effable, and understandable through studying, and its evidence becomes accessible to all through behaviour. 6. अिस्थरता , अ निश्चयता मूलक भौ तकवाद ...
[MVD p5 ?] ...पासना - आराधना - अच ना - स्तवन काय  सम्पन्न होता रहा। My ancestors were called Vedmurti (apostles of Vedic knowledge) in the place of my birth. My home and village were filled with the sounds of Vedanta , Upanishads , and Darshanas . In my family, there was a tradition of performing upasana , aradhana , archana , and stavan according to the Vedas. 9. हमारे प रवार परंपरा में शीष  को ट के  वद्वान सेवा भावी तथा श्रम शील व्यवहाराभ्यास एवं कमा भ्यास सहज रहा िजसमें से श्रमशीलता एवं सेवा प्रवृ त्तयाँ मुझको स्वीकार हुआ।  व...
[MVD p8 ?] ...nce of biological cells. These biological cells eventually formed complex organisms and, as the organisms evolved and became enriched, forests and vegetation appeared. From these biological cells, animal bodies were formed, including the human body, and their traditions were established. 14. सहअिस्तत्व में ही :- शरीर व जीवन के संयुक्त रुप में मानव परंपरा होना समझ में आया। सहअिस्तत्व में से के  लए :- सहअिस्तत्व  नत्य प्रभावी होना समझ में आया। यही  नय तक्रम होना समझ में आया। In coexistence itself : - The human tradit...
[MVD p9 ?] ...der ● Animal Order ● Knowledge Order (ii) Four planes in existence ● Biological plane ● Delusion plane ● Deific plane ● Divine plane (iii) and ● Development progression, Development ● Awakening progression, Awakening and the eternal grandeur of awakened human tradition as orderly living with human-ness and participation in the overall orderliness was understood. I accepted this as the essence of universal wellbeing and recognised the natural expectation for goodness in all humans. As a result, I have presented to h...
[MVD p12 ?] ...iment ● Realisation itself is the ultimate evidence, Evidence itself is the understanding or knowledge, Understanding itself is manifest, The manifest itself is resolution, work and behaviour, Work and behaviour itself is evidence, Evidence itself is awakened tradition, Awakened tradition itself is coexistence. 8. यथाथ  ● ब्रह्म सत्य , जगत शाश्वत । ● ब्रह्म ( सत्ता ) व्यापक , जीवन पुंज अनेक । ● जीवन पुंज में अ वभाज्य आत्मा , बुद् ध ,  चत्त , वृ त्त , मन । page- 12 ...
[MVD p13 ?] ...tates are many. ● Human dharma is one, resolutions are many. ● Jeevan is immortal; birth and death are occurrences. 9. Actuality ● Development Progression, Development in Coexistence. ● Awakening Progression, Awakening. ● Expressions of Awakening - Wise Human Tradition. 10. The Knowledge ● Knowledge of jeevan in coexistence ● Knowledge of holistic view of existence in the form of coexistence ● Knowledge of humane conduct ● Realisation itself is knowledge 11. अनुसंधान ● गठन पूण ता । ●  क्रया पूण ता । ● आचरण पूण ता ।...

----- TERM: generation -----
[MVD p29 ?] ... आचरण अ ग्रम पीढ़ी के  लये  शक्षाप्रद एवं प्रेरणादायी है । यह मानवीयता में ही सफल है । िजस  व ध से भी चेतना  वकास मूल्य  शक्षा के  लए सहज सहायता  मला हो उन सभी के  लए कृतज्ञता है । The conduct of those who bear gratitude is educative and inspiring for the next generation. This can only be accomplished within the purview of humaneness. I express my gratitude to all those who have been helpful in any way for establishing consciousness development and value education. “ ज्ञानात्मनो व जयते ” - ए . नागराज Knowledge leads...
[MVD p153 Chapter-10] ...t along with the body is referred to as external. ● समा तरेक ( सृजन )  वषमता के  लए कारण ,  वषमा तरेक (  वसज न ) सम  क्रया सम्पन्न होने का कारण है । यही रचना -  वरचना क्रम स्थूल  क्रया में स्पष्ट है । The excess of generative (creation) becomes the cause of degeneration, while the excess of degenerative (dissolution) becomes the cause of generative activity. This cycle of composition and decomposition can be observed in the gross (insentient) activities. ● मानव जागृ त पूव क यथािस्थ त में ही मध्यस्थ है । यथािस्थ त ह...
[MVD p264 Chapter-16] ...omain “Lawful” (The tendency of awakened human) “Unlawful” (The tendency of deluded human) प्राकृ तक सम्प त्त ख नज वन का उनके उत्पादन के अनुपात में व्यय प्रमाण The evidence of expenditure of natural abundance like minerals and forests in proportion to their regeneration. प्राकृ तक सम्प त्त का उत्पादन से अ धक व्यय ( अ त रक्त व्यय ) Expenditure of natural abundance, in excess to their regeneration. प्राकृ तक सम्प त्त के संतुलन में पूरक होने का प्रमाण The evidence of being complementary in the balance of natural abund...

----- TERM: family -----
[MVD p5 ?] ...रंपरा में वेदसम्मत उपासना - आराधना - अच ना - स्तवन काय  सम्पन्न होता रहा। My ancestors were called Vedmurti (apostles of Vedic knowledge) in the place of my birth. My home and village were filled with the sounds of Vedanta , Upanishads , and Darshanas . In my family, there was a tradition of performing upasana , aradhana , archana , and stavan according to the Vedas. 9. हमारे प रवार परंपरा में शीष  को ट के  वद्वान सेवा भावी तथा श्रम शील व्यवहाराभ्यास एवं कमा भ्यास सहज रहा िजसमें से श्रमशीलता एवं सेवा प्रवृ त्तयाँ म...
[MVD p18 ?] ...ट्र व अन्तरा ष्ट्र ) तथा दश सोपानीय प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था में  न व षमता ( सामरस्यता ) एवं एकसूत्रता । Universal Auspiciousness ● Harmony and integrality in all four dimensions (work, behaviour, thought, and realisation), all five statuses (individual, family, society, nation, and world) of humans, and the ten-tier family based self-governance orderliness. 28. महा मांगल्य ● सत्यानुभू त जागृ त ( भ्रम मुिक्त ) । The Greatest Auspiciousness ● Awakening as realisation in truth (liberation from delusion) 29. उपलि...
[MVD p19 ?] ... ● Consciousness development value education ● Technical education 31. परम्परा में सम्पूण ता ● मानवीय  शक्षा संस्कार । ● मानवीय सं वधान । ● मानवीय प रवार मूलक स्वराज्य व्यवस्था । Wholeness in Tradition ● Humane education sanskar ● Humane Constitution ● Humane family-based self-governance orderliness page- 19 ...
[MVD p20 ?] ...on, way, and orderliness is primarily responsible for these conflicts. Furthermore, the expansionist tendency for ownership and property also fuels these conflicts. This is the crux of the matter. Conflict among humans leads to every organised unit, such as a family or a group, justifying their expansion of ownership and property because they believe in superiority of their civilisation and culture, which they expound and manifest in their conduct and behaviour. This is true for every sectarian division. इस ऐ तहा स...
[MVD p21 ?] ...्रकट करने का शुभ अवसर मुझे प्राप्त हुआ है । ” I have got an auspicious opportunity to present Madhyasth Darshan, which is based on the noble wish to quench the thirst for justice found in every person, satisfy the desire for resolution and prosperity in every family, and attain complete acceptance in coexistence, while also striving towards a classless society. “ सहअिस्तत्व सूत्र व्याख्या ही स्वयं में सामरस्यता है। ” सामरस्यता की िस्थ त रूप , गुण , स्वभाव एवं धम  की साम्यता समाधान पर आधा रत है , जो दृष्टव्य अथा त् ...
[MVD p55 Chapter-4] ...attaining restfulness. ● एक से अ धक मानव एकत्र या संग ठत होने को प रवार , समुदाय व अखण्ड समाज संज्ञा है । जागृत मानव परम्परा में साव भौम व्यवस्था पूव क अखण्ड समाज प्रमा णत होता है । More than one human coming together or becoming organised is referred to as a family, community, or undivided society. In the awakened human tradition, undivided society is evidenced along with the universal orderliness. ● संगठन के  लए कारण साम्यता लक्ष्य साम्यता आवश्यक है । इसके  नवा ह के  लए काय क्रम साम्यता भी आवश्यक है । For an orga...

----- TERM: village -----
[MVD p5 ?] ...वेदान्त , उप नषद तथा दश न ही भाषा ध्व न - धुन के रुप में सुनने में आते रहे। प रवार परंपरा में वेदसम्मत उपासना - आराधना - अच ना - स्तवन काय  सम्पन्न होता रहा। My ancestors were called Vedmurti (apostles of Vedic knowledge) in the place of my birth. My home and village were filled with the sounds of Vedanta , Upanishads , and Darshanas . In my family, there was a tradition of performing upasana , aradhana , archana , and stavan according to the Vedas. 9. हमारे प रवार परंपरा में शीष  को ट के  वद्वान सेवा भावी तथा श्रम...

----- TERM: world family -----
[MVD p88 Chapter-4] ... awakened, are more eminent than humane-humans. Their realisation manifests in human tradition in the form of ‘realisational evidence’. This ‘realisation evidence’ embodies humaneness in work and behaviour, and becomes apparent within the family order and the world family order. This is absolutely necessary. Accordingly, with the co-existential viewpoint, it has now become feasible to recognise and evaluate humaneness in all aspects of behaviour; along with recognising and evidencing ‘realisation-evidences’ in the ...
[MVD p253 Chapter-16] ...his leads to progressively recognising the entire humankind as one unit. Fulfilling happens naturally as a result of recognising. This fulfilling process is bonded with values. The need for participation in the orderliness extends from the family order to the world family order. Humans present themselves with understanding in the course of such participation. It is accessible, natural and necessary to participate in this orderliness through understanding by every man and woman. This is the way the human goals becom...

----- TERM: undivided society -----
[MVD p14 ?] ...तापूण   दव्य मानवीयता । ● गठन पूण ता ,  क्रया पूण ता एवं आचरण पूण ता । The Postulations ● The physicochemical nature itself is in development progression. Atom in the developed form itself is the sentient unit. ● The sentient unit i.e. jeevan itself evidences undivided society in human tradition upon awakening. ● Alertful humaneness, deific humaneness and sociality. ● Divine humaneness with complete awareness. ● Constitutional completeness, Activity completeness, and Conduct completeness. 14. सत्यता ● सत्ता में सम्...
[MVD p15 ?] ...e actions. ● Awakened humans are independent both in performing actions and in experiencing their consequences. 15. मानव शरण ● अखण्ड सामािजकता साव भौम व्यवस्था ( सहअिस्तत्व ) सहज प्रमाण परम्परा । The Refuge of Humans ● The tradition of evidence in the form of undivided society and universal orderliness (coexistence). 16. मानवीय व्यवस्था ● मानवीयता । मानवत्व स हत व्यवस्था , समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी । The Humane Orderliness ● Humaneness. Orderliness with human-ness, participation in the overall orderliness. 17. व्...
[MVD p24 ?] ...iving with firmness towards righteous wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour, (4) For developing the well-defined path from inhumaneness to humaneness, humaneness to higher-humaneness. (5) For fulfilling one’s responsibilities in the undivided society and universal orderliness effortlessly. (6) For evidencing the desired humane culture and civilisation along with their knowledge. (7) For becoming proficient in the law, orderliness and policy aspects for the development of humane culture an...
[MVD p28 ?] ... Absence of delusion itself is awakening, awakening itself is enlightenment, enlightenment itself is sovereignty, sovereignty itself is supreme order and supreme order itself is the undivided society and universal orderliness. Humans themselves are primarily responsible for their decline and development. “ ज्ञानात्मनो व जयते ” Knowledge leads to the mind's victory. page- 28 ...
[MVD p29 ?] ...ता का  नधा रण संभव नहीं है । अस्तु , कृतज्ञता के  बना गौरव , गौरव के  बना सरलता , सरलता के  बना सहअिस्तत्व , सहअिस्तत्व के  बना कृतज्ञता की  नरन्तरता नहीं है । Culture, civilisation, way, and orderliness are mutually complementary. It is impossible to achieve undivided society and sociality without them. Therefore, without gratitude, there can be no continuity of glory, and without glory, there can be no continuity of simplicity. Without simplicity, there can be no continuity of coexistence, and without coexistence...
[MVD p55 Chapter-4] ... ● एक से अ धक मानव एकत्र या संग ठत होने को प रवार , समुदाय व अखण्ड समाज संज्ञा है । जागृत मानव परम्परा में साव भौम व्यवस्था पूव क अखण्ड समाज प्रमा णत होता है । More than one human coming together or becoming organised is referred to as a family, community, or undivided society. In the awakened human tradition, undivided society is evidenced along with the universal orderliness. ● संगठन के  लए कारण साम्यता लक्ष्य साम्यता आवश्यक है । इसके  नवा ह के  लए काय क्रम साम्यता भी आवश्यक है । For an organisation, commonness o...

----- TERM: universal order -----
[MVD p15 ?] ...humans are independent both in performing actions and in experiencing their consequences. 15. मानव शरण ● अखण्ड सामािजकता साव भौम व्यवस्था ( सहअिस्तत्व ) सहज प्रमाण परम्परा । The Refuge of Humans ● The tradition of evidence in the form of undivided society and universal orderliness (coexistence). 16. मानवीय व्यवस्था ● मानवीयता । मानवत्व स हत व्यवस्था , समग्र व्यवस्था में भागीदारी । The Humane Orderliness ● Humaneness. Orderliness with human-ness, participation in the overall orderliness. 17. व्यिक्त में पूण ता ●  क्...
[MVD p24 ?] ...wards righteous wealth, marital faithfulness, and kindness in work and behaviour, (4) For developing the well-defined path from inhumaneness to humaneness, humaneness to higher-humaneness. (5) For fulfilling one’s responsibilities in the undivided society and universal orderliness effortlessly. (6) For evidencing the desired humane culture and civilisation along with their knowledge. (7) For becoming proficient in the law, orderliness and policy aspects for the development of humane culture and civilisation in the ...
[MVD p28 ?] ... Absence of delusion itself is awakening, awakening itself is enlightenment, enlightenment itself is sovereignty, sovereignty itself is supreme order and supreme order itself is the undivided society and universal orderliness. Humans themselves are primarily responsible for their decline and development. “ ज्ञानात्मनो व जयते ” Knowledge leads to the mind's victory. page- 28 ...
[MVD p55 Chapter-4] ...्परा में साव भौम व्यवस्था पूव क अखण्ड समाज प्रमा णत होता है । More than one human coming together or becoming organised is referred to as a family, community, or undivided society. In the awakened human tradition, undivided society is evidenced along with the universal orderliness. ● संगठन के  लए कारण साम्यता लक्ष्य साम्यता आवश्यक है । इसके  नवा ह के  लए काय क्रम साम्यता भी आवश्यक है । For an organisation, commonness of cause and goal is necessary. For its sustainment, commonness of the program is also necessary. ○...
[MVD p57 Chapter-4] ...ed self-organising orderliness. ○ प्रयोजन :- जागृ त पूव क अखण्ड समाज साव भौम व्यवस्था में तन , मन , धन का  नयोजन प्रयोजन है । Purposeful-use ( prayojansheelta ): - Purposeful-use refers to the utilisation of body, mind and wealth towards undivided society and universal orderliness upon awakening. ○ व्यवहा रकता :- मानवीयता पूण  आचरण की व्यवहा रकता संज्ञा है । Practicality ( vyavharikta ): - Humane conduct is referred to as practicality. ● अखण्ड सामािजकता का अध्ययन मानवीय स्वभाव ,  वषय एवं दृिष्ट के आधार पर ही है , ि...
[MVD p65 Chapter-4] ...t in the continuation of the lineage, is referred to as the progeny-motive. ○ लोकेषणा :- अखण्ड समाज व्यवस्था के अथ  में न्याय , धम  दृिष्ट पूव क यश - बल कामना ही लोकेषणा है । Reputation-motive ( lokeshna ): - The wish for recognition for undivided society and universal orderliness based on justice and dharma is referred to as the reputation-motive. ○ समाधान :- कैसे और क्यों की पू त  ( उत्तर ) ही समाधान है । Resolution ( samadhan ): - The fulfilment (answers) of how and why itself is resolution. ○  वश्राम :- िजसमेें...

----- TERM: evaluation -----
[MVD p23 ?] ...ोगा , वह है :- 1. भू म ( अखण्ड राष्ट्र ) एक - राज्य अनेक 2. मानव जा त एक - कम  अनेक , 3. मानव धम  एक - समाधान अनेक , 4. ईश्वर ( व्यापक ) - देवता अनेक । The following are the self-evident basic premises, which we will need to be internalise for performing self-evaluation: - 1. Earth (undivided nation) is one – States are many 2. Human kind is one – vocations are many 3. Human dharma is one – resolutions are many 4. God is omnipresent – deities are many एक - प्रत्येक मानव मानव मात्र को एक इकाई के रूप में जाने और उसके...
[MVD p38 Chapter-2] ...ी सरलता है । Simplicity ( saralta ): - Method of thinking and behaviour that is free from conceit and expresses reality, itself is simplicity. o अ भमान :- आरो पत मानदण्ड , यही अ धमूल्यन , अवमूल्यन ,  नमू ल्यन दोष है । Conceit ( abhiman ): - Conceit is imposed evaluation, which is characterised by the flaws of over-evaluation, under-evaluation, or mis-evaluation. o सहजता :- आडंबर तथा रहस्यता से मुक्त न्यायपूण  व्यवहार व री त ही सहजता है । Effortlessness ( sahajta ): - Just behaviour and norm devoid of pretension and...
[MVD p83 Chapter-4] ...रता के मूल में सत्य भास , आभास , प्रती त ; भास , आभास , प्रती त के मूल में भाषा है । यह सब  चत की  क्रया है जो दश क के जागृ त के अनुसार सफल है अथवा असफल है । Language has sentiment ( bhav ) at its root; sentiment has essentiality at its root; essentiality has evaluation at its root; evaluation has worldview at its root; worldview has perceiver at its root; perceiver has capacity, ability and receptivity at its root; capacity, ability and receptivity have the perception, comprehension and awareness of truth at its r...
[MVD p84 Chapter-4] ... ही समस्त सुखाकाँक्षाएं हैं । All aspirations of happiness are differentiated as the acts of embracing, discarding, self-restraint, grace, accumulation and generosity. o ग्रहण :- उपयो गता के मूल्यांकन की ग्रहण संज्ञा है । Embracing ( grihan ): - Refers to the evaluation of usefulness. o  वसज न :- अनुपयो गता की  वसज न संज्ञा है । Discarding ( visarjan ): - Refers to assessment that something is not useful. o  नग्रह :- स्वसंयमता के अथ  में प्रवृ त्त । Self-restraint ( nigraha ): - Refers to the tendency of self-disci...
[MVD p87 Chapter-4] ...तक मूल्यांकन करने की िस्थ त पय न्त उस एक रूपया का पूण  मूल्यां कत ज्ञान उस इकाई में प्रादुभू त नहीं हुआ । Based on the above reasoning, at the root of the world’s suffering from fragmentation lies the need for every human to evaluate themselves. If one’s self-evaluation is incorrect, it is not possible to gather the capacity required for the study of existence. For example, unless the value of one rupee is fully understood, it is futile to proceed to two or beyond. Likewise, until the value of one rupee is evaluate...
[MVD p95 Chapter-4] ...ं कर पाता । इसी िस्थ त को पूव  में ‘ भ्रान्त ’ के नाम से प र चत कराया गया है । शोषण  क्रया इसी भ्रां त िस्थ त का प रणाम है । First and foremost, humans seek to understand themselves, but due to the inability described above, they are unable to do correct self-evaluation. This state has been defined earlier as 'delusion'. Exploitation is the result of this state of delusion itself. o अत : जागृ त की ओर प्रवृत्त होने के  लए एक मानव की साथ क प्रयुिक्त यही है  क वह अपने से जागृत मानव के  नद श , आदेश एवं संदेश की ओर अपनी...

----- TERM: mutual fulfilment -----
(no hits)